

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      December 5, 2013



Last updated:
  April 2, 2024

    • 2 min read





The newest volume of my Latest in Clinical Nutrition DVD series is now out. Order on my website. It can also now be ordered as a video download.

The last batch of videos from volume 15 just ran out, so running through February I’ll be rolling out the videos from this new DVD, volume 16. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts, but there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up free online at NutritionFacts.org. If you’d like the works—more than 30 hours of video—I have a special on my complete DVD collection (also via download).

Here’s the list of chapters from the new volume 16 DVD – a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org:

All of My DVDs Now Available for Digital Download

The download of my last DVD was so popular that I decided to make them all available as downloadable videos. They’re cheaper, you don’t have to wait for them to be shipped, and you can watch them on the go.

All the proceeds from DVD, download, and book sales go to the 501c3 nonprofit charity that keeps NutritionFacts.org alive and kicking.

Please Consider NutritionFacts.org in Your Year-End Giving

If you were a regular supporter, you’d be watching the new DVD right now! Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $15 monthly contributor will receive the next three DVDs for free (as physical DVDs, downloads, or both–your choice), and anyone signing up as a $25 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs. Monthly supporters already got their new volume 16 DVD weeks ago.

But the best part of donating to support this work is helping to spread this life-saving information. I’ve been speaking at medical conferences a lot lately and have been touched by how many physicians are using my work in their offices. There are doctors that are playing my DVDs on a loop in their waiting rooms. Others have my short videos downloaded on their iPad and play them for patients during visits–showing them a tablet instead of giving them tablets! :)

NutritionFacts.org is a free resource for medical students, health professionals, and everybody else. In the last year alone, NutritionFacts.org pages have been viewed more than 10 million times by people around the world, all for free. And with your support, the sky’s the limit.

Please join the hundreds of viewers like you who have already stepped up to help out. To make a contribution to NutritionFacts.org you can use a credit card, or send a check to”NutritionFacts.org” P.O. Box 11400 Takoma Park, MD 20913.

I hope everyone is having a healthy happy holiday season!

-Michael Greger, M.D.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
