

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      May 31, 2018



Last updated:
  February 25, 2022

    • 2 min read







We launched our Spanish language NutritionFacts.org and social media pages almost one year ago, and since then we have reached tens of thousands more people around the world. Now people can simply go to NutritionFacts.org/es and find our videos, transcripts, doctor’s notes, and other pages all en español.

 



But that’s not the only way to see NutritionFacts.org in other languages. Over 80 volunteers spend time translating video captions into more than 16 languages. To find out if a video is translated into your language, hover over the video, click on the cog wheel, and select “subtitles.”  To become a translation volunteer, apply here.

 

 



When How Not to Die was published just over three years ago, I really had no idea if anyone would read it. I knew it could be an important way to get the research out beyond the NutritionFacts.org website, and I am thrilled that it has now been translated and distributed in 28 languages.

 

 

 

 



People all over the world are completing the Daily Dozen Challenge and posting about it on YouTube and social media.  Have you taken the challenge? Go here to find out how. And for inspiration, check out our playlist of fan-made videos and search the #dailydozenchallenge hashtag on Instagram. 

 

 

We’re excited to be able to open up a new position at NutritionFacts.org. We’re looking for an experienced part-time Digital Marketing Manager to enhance our global reach. 

Read about the role and apply here. (Update: This role has been filled)

 

 



Welcome, Mary!
Mary joins the team as our Media and Events Director, with over ten years of experience in public relations, SEO, and marketing and seven years teaching in higher education. She is passionate about plants – growing them, cooking with them, and teaching people about their many health benefits – and she is honored to be a part of the NutritionFacts team

 

 

Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and June 28th is the day.

 

You can now find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio.

 

Yours in evidence-based nutrition,

Michael Greger, M.D. FACLM
NutritionFacts.org

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
