

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      August 25, 2016



Last updated:
  August 17, 2023

    • 4 min read





 

What better way to celebrate the birthday of someone you care about than with a book like How Not to Die! For one week only, make a tax-deductible donation (of any amount) to NutritionFacts.org and I will mail you a personalized Happy Birthday bookplate made out to anyone you’d like. Bookplates are decorative labels you stick inside the front covers of books. So if there’s anyone in your life that you’d like to have around for a while, this is your chance to have me join in on the celebration. Click here to donate before midnight ET, on September 1, 2016.

 

Speaking of cool gifts, how about a 2017 Dr. Greger’s Daily Dozen calendar? There are twelve months in a year and twelve things I recommend trying to fit into one’s daily routine, so how about a wall calendar featuring a different food and original recipe for each month?  If you have a great recipe that showcases one of the Daily Dozen foods, please consider submitting it for a chance to be featured in the calendar. 

 

 

In the user survey that nearly a thousand of you filled out last month, an emerging theme was the building excitement about our translation of the website into different languages. We are thrilled to announce the hiring of Diana, our new Translations Project Manager, to oversee the much-anticipated launch of the Spanish language NutritionFacts.org. Diana is an engineer and project manager in Monterey, Mexico who will be working with an amazing team of volunteers to bring this website to life.

Are you fluent in Spanish and want to help with this exciting project? Apply here to become a translations volunteer!

 

We have some new openings for medical and nutrition professionals to help answer questions on NutritionFacts.org during weekly 2 hour shifts. If interested, I’d love your help. Apply here.


Even if you’re not a health professional, but still want to volunteer, we have many other opportunities that you can access by signing up for our volunteer newsletter here. We love our volunteers!

 

You can imagine how overwhelming NutritionFacts.org might be for someone new to the site. With videos on more than 2,000 health topics where do you even begin? Imagine someone stumbling onto the site when the new video-of-the-day is about how some spice can be effective in treating a particular form of arthritis. It would be easy to miss the forest for the trees.

Thanks to your feedback, as an experiment, I’ve recorded a batch of 10 new introductory videos with titles like “Why You Should Care About Nutrition,” so you can share them with those who really just need to start with the basics. The first one is set to go up on September 5th, and then I’ll alternate back and forth between these broader overview-type videos and the regularly scheduled content so as not to bore those who just crave the latest science. Please let me know what you think!

Let’s Get Cruising!

This year I’m scheduled to give about 100 presentations around the world. As you can see on my speaking tour schedule I’ve already started booking venues into 2018! There are a few upcoming events that I’m particularly excited about, though. My two favorite conferences are right around the corner:

For health professionals that want continuing medical education credits without leaving their house, check out the online Lifestyle Medicine Core Competencies Program (I contributed a few hours on nutrition).

I’m excited to be joining the Esselstyn clan for events sponsored by Engine 2 and Forks Over Knives in Dallas and Cleveland, speaking locally in DC at The Future of Food and Farming, and participating in the 10-day free online event,PlantPure Summit 2016 starting in less than two weeks!

Then next year I’m going to be speaking on two cruises (with healthy food!):

See you in the hot tub!

 

The best part of speaking for me is the discussion period after my talks where I get to try to answer all those burning questions. But now, thanks to this amazing age we all live in, I can answer your questions without leaving the house! Every month I’m now committed to giving three live half-hour Q&A sessions and today is the day!

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations—2013: Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death, More Than an Apple a Day, 2014: From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food, 2015: Food as Medicine: Preventing and Treating the Most Dreaded Diseases with Diet, and my latest, 2016: How Not To Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers.

 

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
