

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      August 23, 2011
  


Last updated: 
  August 17, 2023
  
    • 2 min read
  


          Image Credit: timsackton / Flickr.  This image has been modified.          

In this month’s Journal of Nutrition, researchers at Penn State report on their experiment in which overweight men were fed a high-fat (chicken) meal with or without a healthy dose of herbs and spices such as cinnamon, cloves, ginger, and oregano. This was to see what effect they might have on antioxidant status and metabolism. The reason they chose spices is because they’re among the most concentrated sources of antioxidants, as I’ve covered in previous videos (though it probably didn’t hurt that the study was funded by the McCormick® spice company).

Not surprisingly, the spice group experienced a doubling of the antioxidant power in their bloodstream compared to those eating an otherwise identical meal without spices. Remarkably, though, the spice group experienced a reduction in postprandial (after a meal) lipidemia (fat levels in the blood)–30% lower triglyceride levels. Over time, this could decrease heart disease risk. The researchers conclude with the sentence: “Therefore, the incorporation of spices into the daily diet may help normalize postprandial disturbances in glucose [sugar] and lipid [fat] homeostasis [control] while enhancing antioxidant defense.” Why experience such disturbances in the first place, though? Yes, another new study found, it’s particularly important for those who smoke to eat lots of greens to reduce cancer risk, but it needn’t be one or the other. An antioxidant-rich plant-based diet offers the best of both worlds.

To exaggerate the effects of the spices in the study, the researchers instructed the control group to eat a diet especially low in antioxidants. So they could eat all the meat, dairy, and eggs they wanted, white bread and pasta too, as long as it was “not whole grain,” and rice as long as it was “not…brown.” They could have soup, as long as they “avoid[ed] listed veggies.” The only vegetables that were allowed in unlimited quantities were iceberg lettuce and cucumbers.

In my new video-of-the-day today, I pit iceberg lettuce against the best animal foods have to offer, with some surprising results. For example, which has more antioxidants: eggs or Coca Cola®? There is a meat that can beat out iceberg lettuce, but even ox livers–the wild blueberry of the animal kingdom–pale in comparison to the antioxidant content of a candy bar.

-Michael Greger, M.D.

More blogs about the antioxidant spice study:
How spicy food can benefit metabolism
Spices reduce insulin, triglycerides after a fatty meal
Antioxidant spices…reduce negative effects of high-fat meal

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!