

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      July 22, 2021



Last updated:
  March 20, 2024

    • 3 min read





By now, you are probably familiar with my Daily Dozen checklist, a simple tracker that can help you get into the habit of including some of the healthiest of healthy foods and exercise into your everyday routine. But, if you need some extra support and inspiration to get those boxes checked off, join our free Daily Dozen Digest—an 11-week email series full of facts and recipes, all to help you on your health journey. Watch our new video about the Daily Dozen app below, and sign up here for the free Digest.






One of our amazing supporters, Janet Bruce, will match all donations using this form for up to a total of $15,000!

Double your impact by making a donation to NutritionFacts.org today…and thank you for your support!

 

 



Smoothies can either be filled with dairy and sugar or be made with some of the healthiest foods on the planet. What does the science say about them? Is there anything we need to be cautious about? Check out the smoothie topic page for a full summary, as well as my videos. (I even have a video where I make my own smoothie recipe!)

 

 

 



Intact barley stands in for cracked bulgur in this hearty salad, but you can use another whole grain if you prefer. This recipe is a great way to make use of any leftover cooked whole grains you may have on hand. A drizzle of tahini sauce adds a unique depth of flavor to the salad. You can find the full recipe here and a video of how it’s made here.

 

 

 

One of my favorite organizations, Physicans Association for Nutrition, is looking for a whole food, plant-based nutrition expert for the position of Medical Content Executive. The position is fully remote, and candidates can be based anywhere in the EU, Africa, or USA (east coast). Go here for more information and to apply.

 

 

 



I have been doing Portuguese translations for a few years. I love doing it, because it has a real impact on the health of so many people and the planet. The work of NutritionFacts.org is very important for many reasons. One of the major reasons, in my view, is that it sharpens critical thinking and shows the biases that exist even in scientific work.

My favorite whole food, plant-based dish is curry. I love to put a lot of antioxidant-rich spices in it, and I replace the oil with tomato paste and ground flaxseed.

 

 



 



What Causes Cancer to Metastasize?
Palmitic acid, a saturated fat concentrated in meat and dairy, can boost the metastatic potential of cancer cells through the fat receptor CD36.

 

 



The Benefits of Moringa: Is It the Most Nutritious Superfood?
Does the so-called miracle tree live up to the hype?

 

 

 



Flashback Friday: Eating More to Weigh Less

Energy density explains how a study can show participants lose an average of 17 pounds within 21 days while eating a greater quantity of food.

 



Every other month, I do a live Q&A directly from my treadmill, and Thursday, July 22 is the day.

Join on our Facebook page or YouTube channel at 3pm ET. I’ll be streaming to both at the same time!


You can find links to past live Q&A’s here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, don’t forget I have an audio podcast to keep you company, too.


And check out my recent dualing-treadmills interview with The Jaroudi Family.

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
