

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      December 13, 2012



Last updated:
  November 6, 2023

    • 1 min read



          Image Credit: angels aguirre / Flickr.  This image has been modified.

Though official recommendations are to first treat high cholesterol with dietary change, many physicians jump right to cholesterol-lowering medications such as statins like Lipitor that can have an array of side effects. As described in my 1-min. video Diet Versus Drugs for High Cholesterol, up to a third of patients prescribed cholesterol-lowering drugs experience adverse reactions. Side effects include liver, muscle, and kidney dysfunction, skin disorders, abdominal pain, nausea, constipation, dizziness, flushing, neurological disorders, and cognitive impairment.

Dietary and lifestyle changes, on the other hand, tend to carry positive side effects. That’s why they are the cornerstones of the American Heart Association guidelines. Recommendations include reduced intake of saturated fat and cholesterol with increased physical activity and intake of dietary fiber. Basically we need to eat fewer animal foods, the only source of cholesterol, and more plants, the only source of fiber. One plant food that may be particularly protective is nuts. See Nuts and Bolts of Cholesterol Lowering for a pooled analysis of studies on nut consumption, cholesterol levels, and risk of death from heart disease.

For more on reducing cholesterol, the #1 risk factor for our #1 cause of death, see:

 For preventing our other top killers, see Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death.

For more on nuts, see:

–Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my videos for free by clicking here.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
