

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      March 28, 2024



Last updated:
  March 28, 2024

    • 2 min read





Dr. Greger developed the Daily Dozen using the best available balance of evidence from scientific nutrition research. Rather than being a meal plan or diet in itself, the Daily Dozen is a checklist to inspire you to include some of the healthiest of healthy foods in your everyday routine and encourage you to design more balanced meals. The Daily Dozen is meant to serve as an aspirational minimum, so feel free to add even more whole, plant-based foods throughout your day. 

Here are some recipes to help you check off some Daily Dozen boxes.



Check out our Brownie Sandwich Cookies for a fun way to incorporate beans into your desserts.



The Cheesy Broccoli Soup from The How Not to Diet Cookbook is the perfect way to add some cruciferous vegetables to your meals. We eat first with our eyes, and the lovely green broccoli florets against a backdrop of cheesy broth will have you wanting to eat with your mouth, too.



Who doesn’t love a good smoothie? This Pre-Workout Smoothie is especially antioxidant-packed and has a beautiful color that is irresistible!



This Sensational Tahini–Dill Dressing is a quick and delicious sauce that can be used in a variety of ways. Serve it over whole grain and bean bowls, chopped salads, roasted potatoes, or pasta salads.



Kongguksu, Korean Soy Milk Noodles, combines a homemade soy broth with whole-grain buckwheat noodles and vegetables. The broth is usually served cold but can be enjoyed warm if desired. Feel free to top the dish with any additional vegetables of choice.



Groatnola is a homemade, health-promoting breakfast cereal that’s made with simple whole food, plant-based ingredients. Treat the granola like regular breakfast cereal, and pair it with berries, walnuts, pumpkin seeds, ground flaxseed, and unsweetened soymilk. Use the granola with smoothie bowls or sprinkle it on top of nice cream.

 

We have many more recipes available on our whole food, plant-based recipes page. 

If you’d like to share your experience with the Daily Dozen with your friends and family to help inspire them to include plant-based foods into their meals, check out our Daily Dozen Challenge! Together, we can help encourage more people to adopt healthier lifestyle habits. The English, Spanish, and Chinese versions of The Evidence-Based Eating Guide are available pre-printed through the DrGreger.org store and are 20% off through May 20, 2024. 

Join us for eleven weeks of Daily Dozen support emails to help you Do the Dozen with ease. Each week, we will send you an email with tips, tricks, facts, and tasty recipes to help you incorporate some of the healthiest of healthy foods into your daily routine.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
