

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      March 31, 2016



Last updated:
  April 5, 2024

    • 4 min read





I was recently honored to be invited to Google to present on How Not to Die, and they made it into an official Talk@Google! View the presentation I’ve been giving around the country on my book tour for free at bit.ly/googlegreger. It’s basically a 2016 updated version of my Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death talk.

It’s been such a pleasure and privilege to meet so many people whose lives my work has touched over the last few months touring around the country. With my speaking tour winding down (only about 50 cities left—phew!), I’m eager to catch up on all the research I’ve missed. I just completed the next nine weeks of NutritionFacts.org videos, available now in sneak preview form as part of my new DVD, in which I do a deep dive into the subject of vinegar.

Vinegar has been used as a weight-loss aid and folk remedy for diabetes for centuries, but does it actually work? Find out in my new 5-video series:

*Spoiler alert*: Let’s just say I now try to sneak vinegar into all my family’s meals.

I also have new videos queued up over the next few months on wheatgrass juice, Paleo diet bone broth, and protein combining. If you don’t want to wait, all of these videos are available now as a digital download as part of my new Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 30 (all proceeds go to charity). It can also be ordered as a physical DVD.

The current batch of videos from volume 29 are about to run out on NutritionFacts.org. So, starting next month and running until June, I’ll roll out the videos from this new DVD, volume 30. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts, but there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up free online here at NutritionFacts.org. If you’d like the works—50+ hours of video—you can get the complete DVD collection.

Here’s the list of chapters from the new volume 30 DVD—a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org:

Order my new DVD at DrGreger.org/dvds  or through Amazon. It can also be ordered as a video download at DrGreger.org/downloads.

If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a vinegar expert by now, having already received the new DVD. I come out with new DVDs every 9 weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.

Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $15 monthly contributor will receive the next three DVDs for free (as physical DVDs, downloads, or both—your choice), and anyone signing up as a $25 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs. If you’re already signed up and didn’t receive your volume 30 yet, please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better.

If you’d rather just watch all the videos online as they launch, but would still like to support my work of helping to educate millions about healthy eating, you can make a tax-deductible donation to my 501c3 nonprofit organization NutritionFacts.org using a credit card, Bitcoin, a direct PayPal link, or by sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” PO Box 11400, Takoma Park, MD 20913.

If you are an app developer or designer, you can contribute to NutritionFacts.org’s free Daily Dozen app for Android and iPhone, now an open-source project on Github — meaning anyone, including you, can play a part in its future development.  Check out the latest details here on how to get started, links to our Github repositories, Contribution Guidelines, and more!

If none of that last paragraph made any sense to you, don’t worry—there are still ways you can help! Keep an eye on our ever-changing volunteer, internship, and employment pages.

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live year-in-review presentations Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death, More Than an Apple a Day, From Table to Able, and Food as Medicine.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
