

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      August 6, 2015
  


Last updated: 
  April 5, 2024
  
    • 4 min read
  




They are available right now as a video download as part of my new Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 26 (all proceeds go to this charity). The smoothie videos are all scheduled to go up on NutritionFacts.org in September, but you can download and watch them right now.

Wait a second. Why spend five videos sifting through the science, profiling all the original experiments, and turning it into one big detective story when I could have just cut to the chase and did a five second video and basically said “Drink them” or “Don’t drink them”? Because I don’t want you to ever do anything just because I or anyone else “said so.” That’s one of the problems with the field of nutrition. Everyone seems to have their respective gurus who too often make pronouncements without explaining their reasoning and citing their sources. Can you imagine that flying in any other field of science? It’s not what he said or she said; it’s that the best available balance of evidence bears out. Two plus two equals four no matter what your favorite mathematician says.

Order my new DVD as a video download at DrGreger.org/downloads.

If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a smoothie expert by now, having already received the new DVD. I now come out with new DVDs every 9 weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.

Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $15 monthly contributor will receive the next three DVDs for free (as physical DVDs, downloads, or both–your choice), and anyone signing up as a $25 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs. If you’re already signed up and didn’t receive your volume 26 yet, please email Tommasina@NutritionFacts.org and she’ll make everything all better.

If you’d rather just watch all the videos online as they launch, but would still like to support my work of helping to educate millions about healthy eating, you can make a tax-deductible donation to my 501c3 nonprofit organization NutritionFacts.org using a credit card, a direct PayPal link, or by sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” PO Box 11400, Takoma Park, MD 20913.

Thanks to everyone who donated to the NutritionFacts.org Research Fund, we were able to test eight brands of nutritional yeast for the presence of the toxic heavy metal lead. The good news is that we couldn’t find any in most brands, but a few did have detectable levels. The lead contamination was so low that all brands complied with the exceedingly (and justifiably) strict California Prop 65 standards, but I do I advise pregnant women who eat more than a third of a cup a day on a regular basis choose one of the brands that tested free from detectable lead until we know more. Joseph includes details and direct links to all the testing reports in this morning’s blog post Three Brands of Nutritional Yeast Contain Detectable Lead Levels But the Risk is Minimal. What should we test next? Please post your suggestions to the Research Fund page.

If you would like to participate in a research study yourself, you’re in luck! Scientists at Tufts University are currently recruiting adults ages 18+ for an important study on diet and disease. Take the recruitment survey here: http://bit.ly/tuftsresearch

If you’d like to attend a scientific conference and directly learn about cutting-edge nutrition research, I’m speaking at a few in the coming months and would love to see you there:

Keep hydrated out there!

–Michael Greger

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!