

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      May 10, 2018
  


Last updated: 
  February 8, 2022
  
    • 3 min read
  




We’ve had a blast watching so many people take the Daily Dozen Challenge. Last month, I challenged a few of my friends—and all of you!—to pick a day and try to nail the Daily Dozen. See how they did:

And check out a bunch of the videos people have done so far over on our YouTube playlist. Join the hundreds of people taking the challenge and eating all of the healthiest foods I recommend based on years of research. To get in on the fun, download the free updated Dr. Greger’s Daily Dozen app, and head to NutritionFacts.org/daily-dozen-challenge to learn more. 

 

My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. As you can see I’ve started at the beginning of the alphabet again in my research cycle, so acne, aloe, apples, beans, and berries are first up. If your favorite vegetable is zucchini I’m afraid it’s going to be awhile, but I’ll get there! All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now. 

 

If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a monk fruit expert by now, having already received a link to the new digital download. New DVDs and downloads are released every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.

Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor will receive the next three downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, your choice). If you signed up for physical copies, your copy is already on it’s way to you, if you do not have it by May 8 please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better.


We’re excited to be able to open up a new position at NutritionFacts.org. We’re looking for an experienced part-time Digital Marketing Manager to enhance our global reach. 

Job description and application are here. 


Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and May 24th is the day.

You can find links to all of my past YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio.

 

In health,

Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!