

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      November 1, 2018
  


Last updated: 
  March 21, 2024
  
    • 4 min read
  




Last week, October 25, was my birthday. Thank you to everyone who donated to NutritionFacts.org, which I began as a labor of love dedicated to my grandma’s near miraculous recovery from heart disease thanks to lifestyle medicine pioneer Nathan Pritikin. That’s why I went into medicine, that’s why I started NutritionFacts.org, that’s why I wrote How Not to Die, and that’s why 100% of the proceeds I get from my books are all donated to charity. I just want to do for everyone’s family what Pritikin did for my family. If you still want to help celebrate my journey, you can make a tax-deductible donation to keep NutritionFacts.org exploding out into the world.

My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. As you can see, there’s a variety of topics covered, from eggs and breast cancer, “vitamin B17,” light vs. dark roast coffee, and the best foods for bad breath. All of these videos will be rolling out for free online starting at the end of November, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now. 

Best Way to Cook Vegetables 

Order my new DVD as a video download/streaming at DrGreger.org/collections/downloads. And remember, if you watch the videos on NutritionFacts.org or YouTube, you can access captions in several different languages. To find yours, click on the settings wheel on the lower-right of the video and then “Subtitles/CC.” 

If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be an expert on these new topics by now, having already received a link to the new DVD. New DVDs and downloads are released every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.

Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor will receive the next three downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, your choice). If you signed up for physical copies, and do not yet have it, please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better.

In the last dozen years I have created more than 1,500 videos. How often have you seen me on my Live Q&A’s saying “I’ve got a video on that!”? There’s such a treasure trove of life-changing information now that I’ve decided to start digging into the video vault and bringing back some of the classics, complete with an updated Doctor’s Note on Fridays, starting Nov 9.

I need your help in choosing which videos to feature on Flashback Fridays. What are the favorites you’re always sending to family and friends? What videos changed the way you live your life? What were some of the most interesting, groundbreaking, practical findings you learned? Please let me know by voting here.

Dr. David Katz just came out with a new book, The Truth About Food: Why Pandas Eat Bamboo and People Get Bamboozled.  All book proceeds go to a great charity (the True Health Initiative). A man after my own heart!

 

Every month I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and November 15 is the day.

You can find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio.

In health,

Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!