

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      July 17, 2014
  


Last updated: 
  April 4, 2024
  
    • 2 min read
  


          Image Credit: Monica Trzaska.  This image has been modified.          

Order my new live presentation on DVD or download it now (all proceeds go to this charity).

Every year I scour the world’s scholarly literature on clinical nutrition, pulling together what I find to be the most interesting, practical, and groundbreaking science on how to best feed ourselves and our families. I start with the 12,000 or so papers published annually on human nutrition and, thanks to a crack team of volunteers (and now staff!), I’m able to whittle those down to about 3,000 studies, which are downloaded, categorized, read, analyzed, and churned into a few hundred short videos. This allows me to post new videos and articles every day, year-round, to NutritionFacts.org. This certainly makes the site unique. There’s no other science-based source for free daily updates on the latest discoveries in nutrition. The problem is that the amount of information can be overwhelming.

Currently I have videos covering 1,814 nutrition topics. Where do you even begin? Many have expressed their appreciation for the breadth of material, but asked that I try to distill it into a coherent summary of how best to use diet to prevent and treat chronic disease. I took this feedback to heart and in 2012 developed Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death, which explored the role diet may play in preventing, arresting, and even reversing our top 15 killers. Not only did it rise to become one of the Top 10 Most Popular Videos of 2012, it remains my single most viewed video to date, watched over a million times (NutritionFacts.org is now up to more than a million hits a month!).

In 2013 I developed the sequel, More Than an Apple a Day: Combating Common Diseases, in which I explored the role diet could play in treating some of our most common conditions. I’ve been presenting it around the country over the past year and it ended up #1 on our Top 10 Most Popular Videos of 2013.

Now I’m honored to bring you the third of the trilogy, From Table to Able: Combating Disabling Diseases with Food, in which I explore the role of diet in correcting some of our leading causes of disability. As soon as the current lineup of videos is exhausted in August I’ll post the full presentation online, but if you can’t wait, you can download and watch it right now.

To more easily navigate through the menu of diseases I cover in this new presentation, it is also available on DVD through my website or through Amazon. If you want to share copies with others, I have a five for $40 special on my website (enter coupon code 5FOR40TTA). All proceeds from the sales of all my books, DVDs, and presentations go to the 501c3 nonprofit charity that keeps NutritionFacts.org free for all, for all time. If you want to support this initiative to educate millions about eradicating dietary diseases, please consider making a donation.

After you’ve watched the new presentation, make sure you’re subscribed to get my video updates daily, weekly, or monthly to stay on top of all the latest. For now, though, air-pop some popcorn, sit back, and enjoy!

-Michael Greger, M.D.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!