

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      January 2, 2018
  


Last updated: 
  May 21, 2024
  
    • 3 min read
  




We just wrapped up our end-of-year donation drive. As you know, your contributions make NutritionFacts.org possible. Whether you donated or not, I appreciate your support in keeping evidence-based information alive.

And speaking of getting evidence-based eating info out to millions, I’m honored to have been invited to be on ABC’s Live with Kelly and Ryan. Make sure to tune in on Thursday, January 11th!

My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. As you can see below, the main focus is on mammograms. Most women are just told what to do, rather than being given the facts necessary to make a fully informed decision. That’s why I decided to do a deep dive into the topic. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now.

If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a mammogram expert by now, having already received a link to the new DVD. New DVDs are released every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.


Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor will receive the next three downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, your choice). If you signed up for physical copies, you should have already received this volume, but if not please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better.

Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and January 25 is the day.

You can catch all of my past live YouTube Q&As here and Faceboook Q&As here. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio. 

In health,

Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!