

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      August 30, 2018



Last updated:
  March 21, 2024

    • 3 min read





Whenever I’m speaking at events, people tell me these amazing stories about reinventing their health through evidence-based nutrition. Has healthy eating changed your life? Tell us your story here, and we may share it on our social media to help inspire others.

Speaking of inspiration – the team at NutritionFacts.org was blown away by your great feedback about our new shirts. If you ordered one, we’d love to see how you’re wearing it and spreading the healthy lifestyle message with everyone who sees you! Tag @nutrition_facts_org or use the hashtag #nutritionfactsorg on Instagram so we can see your pics.



My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. As you can see below, there’s a whole grab-bag of goodies, with new videos on cheese, coffee, ginger and macrobiotic diets. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now. 


Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor will receive the next three downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, your choice). If you signed up for physical copies, your copy is already on its way to you. If you do not have it by August 26, please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better.

We are looking for volunteers with experience in English-Hindi translation as we bring the latest research on evidence-based nutrition to more people in India! We are also taking applications for more Hebrew and Mandarin translators. Apply today and help us spread the word.

 

 


There’s now one more place you can find life-changing content—right on your iPhone. I’m excited to announce that we’re now publishing blogs five days a week on Apple News. Just search for NutritionFacts.org, then tap the heart to follow and get the articles in your news feed.  

 

 

Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and the next one is Sept 27.
Facebook Live: At 12:00 p.m. ET go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions.
YouTube Live Stream: At 1:00 p.m. ET go here to watch live and ask even more questions! 

You can now find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio.

In health,

Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
