

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      December 9, 2014
  


Last updated: 
  April 5, 2024
  
    • 3 min read
  




Considering concerns over saturated fat to be the #1 threat to their growth, the global dairy industry launched a covert campaign to “neutralize the negative image of milkfat among regulators and health professionals.” This would be no small task, as leading health authorities around the world encourage the public to decrease saturated fat consumption “as low as possible” to lower the risk of chronic disease. Learn how the industry attempted to undermine the global scientific consensus and the fatal flaw in the recent saturated fat meta-analysis in a new series of videos I just completed. They are all available right now as a video download as part of my new Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 22 (all proceeds go to this charity). It can also be ordered as a physical DVD.

The saturated fat videos are all scheduled to go up on NutritionFacts.org early next year, but you can download and watch them right now.

The current batch of videos from volume 21 on NutritionFacts.org is set to run out soon, so starting next month and running through January, I’ll be rolling out the videos from this new DVD, volume 22. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts, but there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up free online at NutritionFacts.org. If you’d like the works–40+ hours of video–you can get the complete DVD collection.

Here’s the list of chapters from the new volume 22 DVD — a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org:

Order my new DVD at DrGreger.org/dvds or through Amazon. It can also be ordered as a video download at DrGreger.org/downloads.

DVD Subscription

If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a saturated fat expert by now, having gotten the new DVD two weeks ago! I now come out with new DVDs every 9 weeks (*phew*). If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.

Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $15 monthly contributor will receive the next three DVDs for free (as physical DVDs, downloads, or both–your choice), and anyone signing up as a $25 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs. If you’re already signed up and didn’t receive your volume 22 yet, please email Tommasina@NutritionFacts.org and she’ll make everything all better.

If you’d rather just watch all the videos online as they launch, but would still like to support my work of cutting through the confusion and educating millions about healthy eating, you can make a year-end tax-deductible donation to NutritionFacts.org using a credit card, a direct PayPal link, or by sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” P.O. Box 11400 Takoma Park, MD 20913.

If you missed it last week, I featured an exclusive guest blog post by dietitian powerhouse Vesanto Melina, who made it her mission to come up with some celebratory superfood suggestions for the holidays. Check it out: Healthy Holiday Recipes. Hope everyone had a happy Thanksgiving!

Internship Opportunities
We have three new internship opportunities coming up in 2015:

They are all remote, meaning the work can be done from anywhere, but unfortunately are all unpaid. They could be a great learning experience, though, not to mention how much good you’d be doing for the world by helping us help everyone make better dietary decisions. For more details, see our new Internship Opportunities page.

In my next DVD I’ll address the Mediterranean diet–stay tuned!

–Michael Greger, M.D.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!