

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      June 5, 2014



Last updated:
  April 3, 2024

    • 3 min read





Exciting news! I just signed a book deal with a new non-fiction division of famed science publisher Macmillan. The book is provisionally entitled How Not to Die: Simple Secrets for Longer Living. The manuscript is due by March 2015, so the 9 month gestation starts this week!

That’s the good news. The bad news is that with a new book project taking over my life I may have to scale back on new videos for NutritionFacts.org. I’m already reaching millions through the website, but a smash bestseller could expose this life-changing, life-saving research to millions more. All proceeds from the sales of the book will go to charity, the 501c3 nonprofit organization that keeps NutritionFacts.org up and running, as does all the money I receive for speaking engagements and DVD sales.

And speaking of DVDs… the newest volume of my Latest in Clinical Nutrition DVD series is now available. Order on my website or through Amazon (all proceeds go to the 501c3 nonprofit charity that keeps NutritionFacts.org thriving). It can also be ordered as an instant video download.

The current batch of videos from volume 18 on NutritionFacts.org just ran out, so starting this month and running through until August, I’ll be rolling out the videos from this new DVD, volume 19. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts, but there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up free online here at NutritionFacts.org. If you’d like the works—40+ hours of video—I have a special on my complete DVD collection.

Here’s the list of chapters from the new volume 19 DVD — a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org:

Order my new DVD at DrGreger.org/dvds or through Amazon. It can also be ordered as a video download at DrGreger.org/downloads.

Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $15 monthly contributor will receive the next three DVDs for free (as physical DVDs, downloads, or both–your choice), and anyone signing up as a $25 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs. If you’re already signed up and didn’t receive your volume 19 yet, please email Tommasina at Tommasina@NutritionFacts.org and she’ll make everything all better.

If you’d rather just watch all the videos online as they launch, but would still like to support my work of serving up dietary sanity, you can make a tax-deductible donation to NutritionFacts.org using a credit card, a direct PayPal link, or sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” P.O. Box 11400 Takoma Park, MD 20913.

Have a blessed summer, and wish me luck on the book!

-Michael Greger, M.D.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
