

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      June 28, 2018
  


Last updated: 
  March 21, 2024
  
    • 4 min read
  






Have you wanted to get healthier menus in your local schools, hospitals, or other institutions but didn’t know where to start? Now you can use Balanced’s new resources to lead healthy-menu campaigns where you live. Balanced is the nonprofit public health and nutrition advocacy group that NutritionFacts helped launch last year, and they just released their Community Advocacy Program.

This program provides resources for advocates to lead successful healthy menu campaigns in their communities. It includes a downloadable advocacy guide and resource toolkits, an optional 30-day training series, support from the Balanced team, connection to a network of like-minded advocates across the country, and specially tailored resources for each campaign.

To get the toolkit and sign up for the training series, or donate to sponsor an advocate, visit balanced.org/lead



My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now. 

If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a coffee expert by now, having already received a link to the new DVD. New DVDs and downloads are released every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.

Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor will receive the next three downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, your choice). If you signed up for physical copies, your copy is already on it’s way to you, if you do not have it by June 25th, please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better.

 


Want to know which healthiest-of-healthy foods I suggest eating on a regular basis?  Find out by downloading my free Daily Dozen app where you can see the list of foods, examples, and even links to videos about each item. Just search for Dr. Greger’s Daily Dozen in your Apple or Android app store and get started tracking your progress right away. Then take the Daily Dozen Challenge by checking off all of the boxes in one day; share your success with us by using the #dailydozenchallenge hashtag. 

 

 


The How Not to Die Cookbook is packed with over 100 recipes for delicious meals, snacks, and beverages made with 100% green-light ingredients to help you eat your way to better health. I was fortunate to work with skilled recipe-developer Robin Robertson who helped turn my Daily Dozen and Dining by Traffic Light strategies into delicious recipes. Get a taste right now at nutritionfacts.org/recipes. 

*100% of the proceeds I receive from all of my books are donated to charity.

 


Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and today is the day.




You can now find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio. 

In health,

Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!