

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      October 1, 2015



Last updated:
  May 20, 2024

    • 4 min read





In 12 short years, government panels have gone from suggesting widespread calcium supplementation may be necessary to protect our bones to “Do Not Supplement,” based in part on studies suggesting calcium supplements increases the risk of heart attacks and strokes. But hip fractures can be devastating too. Has your doctor laid out all the risks and benefits? I do my best in a two-part video series coming soon on NutritionFacts.org:

If you want to watch both videos now, though, they are available as a video download as part of my new Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 27 (all proceeds go to charity). It can also be ordered as a physical DVD. The calcium videos are both scheduled to go up on NutritionFacts.org in November, but you can download and watch them right now. Other videos included in the volume that I expect may be popular include Should We All Get Colonoscopies Starting at Age 50? and Find Out If Your Doctor Takes Drug Company Money.

The current batch of videos from volume 26 on NutritionFacts.org just ran out, so starting this month and running until December, I’ll be rolling out the videos from this new DVD, volume 27. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts, but there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up free online here at NutritionFacts.org. If you’d like the works–50+ hours of video–you can get the complete DVD collection.

Order my new DVD at DrGreger.org/dvds or through Amazon. It can also be ordered as a video download at DrGreger.org/downloads.

If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a calcium (and colonoscopy!) expert by now, having already received the new DVD. I come out with new DVDs every 9 weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.

Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $15 monthly contributor will receive the next three DVDs for free (as physical DVDs, downloads, or both–your choice), and anyone signing up as a $25 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs. If you’re already signed up and didn’t receive your volume 27 yet, please email Tommasina@NutritionFacts.org and she’ll make everything all better.

If you’d rather just watch all the videos online as they launch, but would still like to support my work of helping to educate millions about healthy eating, you can make a tax-deductible donation to my 501c3 nonprofit organization NutritionFacts.org using a credit card, a direct PayPal link, or by sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” PO Box 11400, Takoma Park, MD 20913.

Thanks to the extraordinary response to the upcoming publication of my magnum opus, pre-orders shot How Not to Die to #8 on Amazon! If you have not pre-ordered it yet, then go to http://www.NutritionFacts.org/book .

If you haven’t pre-ordered it for everyone on your holiday gift list yet (it comes out December 8!) then please pre-order more! 100% of proceeds I receive go directly to support my 501c3 nonprofit NutritionFacts.org. You can also enter to win a pre-order contest! Details at http://www.NutritionFacts.org/book .

It is so validating to see pre-order sales climb and realize how deeply my work is valued. I’m so excited for everyone to get it and see what I’ve been up to all year!

-Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live year-in-review presentations Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death, More Than an Apple a Day, From Table to Able, and Food as Medicine.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
