

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      August 7, 2014



Last updated:
  April 4, 2024

    • 4 min read





Until recently, those complaining to their doctors about symptoms associated with the wheat protein gluten were commonly referred to psychiatrists. The medical profession has a tragic history of dismissing genuine diseases as all in peoples’ heads. PTSD, ulcerative colitis, migraines, ulcers, asthma, Parkinson’s and MS were all conditions that were originally rejected by the prevailing medical community as mere psychosomatic hysteria. On the flip side, the internet is rife with unsubstantiated claims like “17 million Americans are gluten sensitive,” which has spilled over into the popular press to make gluten the diet villain du jour. This has led to a multi-billion dollar gluten-free food industry. Any time there’s that much money at stake, it’s hard to trust anyone, so as always, best to stick to the science. This is easier said than done, though–more than 10,000 papers have been published on gluten in the medical literature. But that’s what you have me for! Allow me to spare your summertime beach reading list and do all the work for you. Is gluten sensitivity real? If so, how many does it affect? Should one just err on the side of caution and avoid gluten or are there actual benefits of gluten on which the gluten-free crowd is missing out? I answer these and lots more questions in three new videos on gluten in my new DVD, Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 20. The gluten videos will all be up in a few weeks on NutritionFacts.org, but you can watch them right now via video download or order them on DVD on my website or through Amazon (all proceeds go to this charity). The current batch of videos from volume 19 on NutritionFacts.org just ran out, so starting this month and running through October, I’ll be rolling out the videos from this new DVD, volume 20. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts, but there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up free online here at NutritionFacts.org. If you’d like the works–40+ hours of video–I have a new 1-20 set for the complete DVD collection. Here’s the list of chapters from the new volume 20 DVD — a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org:

Order my new DVD at DrGreger.org/dvds or through Amazon. It can also be ordered as a video download at DrGreger.org/downloads.

If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a gluten expert by now, having gotten the new DVD weeks ago! I now come out with DVDs at an exhausting pace–a new one every 9 weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor. Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $15 monthly contributor will receive the next three DVDs for free (as physical DVDs, downloads, or both–your choice), and anyone signing up as a $25 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs. If you’re already signed up and didn’t receive your volume 20 yet, please email Tommasina at Tommasina@NutritionFacts.org and she’ll make everything all better. If you’d rather just watch all the videos online as they launch, but would still like to support my work of cutting through all the confusion and educating millions about healthy eating, you can make a tax-deductible donation to NutritionFacts.org using a credit card, a direct PayPal link, or by sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” P.O. Box 11400 Takoma Park, MD 20913.

Good news! When I announced my new book deal for How Not to Die with Macmillan Publishers, I expressed concern that I’d have to pull back on the NutritionFacts.org new video schedule. Thanks to everyone’s support I now have a wonderful staff that helps with the logistics of the site (wait until you see the new look–coming soon!), but the primary research and writing falls to me. I didn’t know how I was going to do the book and keep the site going at full tilt, but I am honored to announce that Gene Stone, the best-selling author of Forks Over Knives (and 35 other books, including his new novel The Awareness), has generously agreed to co-author it with me. So now I should be able to do it all without any hiccups–full steam ahead! Gene wants to intersperse my science with personal narratives of those who were able to reap the benefits of a healthier diet. Do you or anyone you know have an inspirational story to share? Especially of interest would be those who successfully treated any of our leading killers–heart disease, cancer, stroke, diabetes, high blood pressure, obesity, lung, liver, kidney or brain disease. If you’d be willing to share your story, please email a brief rundown to testimonials@NutritionFacts.org In my next DVD I’ll address GMOs–stay tuned! -Michael Greger, M.D.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
