

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      September 26, 2019
  


Last updated: 
  March 20, 2024
  
    • 4 min read
  




I knew next to nothing about fasting until I did this deep dive into the medical literature for you. There are, by my count, 1,527 articles on fasting in English-language peer-reviewed scientific journals, and I read every single one of them… so you don’t have to!
 
I’ve compiled all the best science into 41 videos which will drip out on NutritionFacts.org over the next few years, but for those who don’t want to wait, I am holding a series of webinars to go through them all at once and answer questions.

The first webinar in July covered intermittent fasting, time-restricted feeding, and water-only fasting for weight loss. You can get the digital download here. The second webinar, Fasting for Disease Reversal, is coming up this weekend and while registration is already closed, the digital download will be available next week. UPDATE: Thanks to everyone who attended the webinar. If you missed it, the digital download is available here: https://drgreger.org/collections/downloads. 

The final webinar – Fasting and Cancer – will be October 25 at 2pm ET (my birthday!). In this session, I will focus on fasting for cancer as both an adjunct to chemotherapy and as a potential treatment in and of itself. I will also cover fasting for detoxing from chemical pollutants and pros and cons of using VSED—voluntarily stopping eating and drinking—to take control of the end of your life. Read more about it here. 

To join the October 25 webinar: Make a donation through this form and we will send you a link to register for the webinar as a donor reward ($30 is the suggested amount). Registration for the third and final webinar opens: September 19 and closes: midnight on October 18.

My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. As you can see below, the main focus is on intermittent fasting, with the first set of my 41 fasting videos. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now.


Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor will receive the next three downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, your choice). If you signed up for physical copies, your copy is already on its way to you, if you do not have it already, please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better.

Over 15 successful How Not to Die Screening events have taken place around the world since launching this April. These events have brought communities together and have allowed this information to effectively reach wider audiences. Consider hosting a free event in your area: https://nutritionfacts.org/volunteer/screenings.



Do low-carb and ketogenic diets have a metabolic advantage for weight loss?

The clinical use of ketogenic diets for epilepsy and cancer: what does the science say?

How Dr. Greger pressure steams his greens.

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!