

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      November 25, 2021
  


Last updated: 
  December 20, 2022
  
    • 3 min read
  




My new volume of videos—the 56th, if you can believe it!—is out now. In it, I discuss leaky gut, inflammation, the potato series I presented in a webinar a few months ago, and more. It is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. Each video in this new collection will be released online over the next few months, available for free, of course, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch all of them by streaming right now. 

And, remember, if you watch the videos on NutritionFacts.org or YouTube, you can access captions in several different languages. To find yours, click on the settings wheel in the lower-right of the video and then “Subtitles/CC.” Happy viewing!

If you are a $25+ monthly supporter and opted in to our donor rewards, you’re likely already an expert on these new topics by now, since you already received a complimentary link to the new download. If you’d like early access to new videos before they’re available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly supporter. Without your generosity, we wouldn’t be able to continue our work. Thank you!

 

Kabocha is a Japanese pumpkin, and this recipe makes a perfect, hearty meal. Rather than bread cubes, the stuffing for this dish is made with my Basic BROL, combined with onion, celery, kale, and cranberries. The recipe, originally published in The How Not to Diet Cookbook, can be found here. And see our Instagram for a video on how it’s made.

 

 

During the harsh Boston winters while I was in medical school, I would take two freshly microwaved sweet potatoes and pop them into my coat pockets to keep my hands warm. After they cooled down, I had healthy snacks on the go! They are one of my favorite vegetables, and I regularly eat them to check off the “other vegetables” boxes on my Daily Dozen checklist. For more information and my videos on this subject, visit the topic page.

 

I’m frequently asked, “How can I promote evidence-based nutrition professionally?” There’s a new way to get involved in our field! Loma Linda University has just launched a new Master of Science in Plant-Based Nutrition program. Check out the details here.

 

“During the last five years, I have moderated questions and responses from commenters on the videos and blogs Dr. Greger so brilliantly creates. As a nurse and former teacher, I appreciate the opportunity to provide responses that often involve some clarification, detective work, and sometimes even new discoveries. The chance to do this every week makes it especially rewarding to contribute to NF’s important, life-saving goals!

My favorite whole food, plant-based meal is a green salad loaded with beans and healthy carbs, and topped with seeds, nuts, and sprouts!”

 

 

Our extended Black Friday sale is live and will run through November 29! All merch on DrGreger.org is 20% off, including a couple of brand-new, limited-time items. Check it out.

 

 

 

 

The Dangerous Effects of Heavy Metal Music: How might we moderate the rare but very real risk of headbanging?

 

 

 

Medicinal Mushrooms for Cancer Survival: Did the five randomized controlled trials of reishi mushrooms in cancer patients show benefits in terms of tumor response rate, survival time, or quality of life?

 

 

Ochratoxin in Breakfast Cereals: One of the few food contaminants found at higher levels in those eating plant-based diets are mycotoxins, fungal toxins in moldy food ingredients, such as oats.

 

 

Due to my writing schedule for my next book, How Not to Age, I will be taking a break from Q&As until April 2022. In the meantime, you can find links to past live Q&As here on NutritionFacts.org. And, remember, I have an audio podcast to keep you company, too. 

 

 

 

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!