

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      September 23, 2021
  


Last updated: 
  March 29, 2022
  
    • 3 min read
  




Are you a medical professional interested in sharing resources on healthy eating with your patients or clients? To support your important efforts, we invite you to apply to receive free copies of our Evidence-Based Eating Guide by completing this form. 

The Evidence-Based Eating Guide: A Healthy Living Resource from Dr. Greger & NutritionFacts.org is a tool designed to help make the switch to a healthier lifestyle even more simple. It’s easy to understand and filled with information on eating healthier, including a breakdown of Dr. Greger’s Traffic Light Eating, tips for using his Daily Dozen checklist, sample menus, and more.

We hope the guide will help you help your patients or clients improve the length and quality of their lives. (Note: This application is open to health professionals and organizations, but individuals can get the guide for free here.)

 

If you’re a longtime reader of the blog, you may have noticed that they all now end with a “key takeaways” section. A summary has been a common request that I’m excited I’m now able to offer. Sign up here to have the blog delivered straight to your inbox. 

 

 

This recipe comes from The How Not to Diet Cookbook. Don’t let the length intimidate you. It’s as simple to make as it is delicious. I like to make the meatballs and sauce ahead of time so their flavors develop even more. When I’m not in the mood for chimichurri sauce, I substitute my favorite salt-free marinara. Get the free recipe here, and watch how it’s made on our Instagram.

 

 

September 21 was World Alzheimer’s Day. For me, it’s personal. My maternal grandmother died of the disease. I witnessed her decline and Alzheimer’s impact on her when I was in medical school, but my newfound knowledge was useless by then. A disease without a cure or an effective treatment, Alzheimer’s leaves millions of families devastated each year. The good news is that it may be preventable. Read more, and check out all of my videos on the subject on the topic page.

 

We are seeking a Volunteer Production Assistant to regularly support our Design Director with the creation of banner ads and original thumbnails for NutritionFacts.org’s YouTube videos. For more information and to apply, please go to our volunteer page.

 

 

 

“I started volunteering at NutritionFacts.org as a translator almost two years ago. I have been following a WFPB diet for four years now, but I have always been fond of nutrition and research. I am constantly looking for the best ways to nourish our body and be environmentally friendly at the same time, so I thought that being part of this beautiful team was a great opportunity to keep doing it.

I’m a really savoury person, so I would say that my favourite WFPB recipe is any BIG salad with legumes, roasted veggies, and quinoa or rice. I could eat that every day, especially if it has a tahini dressing or hummus in it!”

 

 



Fruits and Vegetables Put to the Test for Boosting Mood: A randomized controlled trial investigates diet and psychological well-being.

 

 

 

Exploiting Sensory-Specific Satiety for Weight Loss: How can we use sensory-specific satiety to our advantage?

 

 

 

How Much Do Doctors Actually Know About Nutrition?: See if you know more about basic nutrition than most doctors.

 

Every other month, I do a Q&A live from my treadmill, and it’s happening today!

Join on our Facebook page or YouTube channel at 3pm EDT. I’ll be streaming to both at the same time!

You can find links to past live Q&As here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember, I have an audio podcast to keep you company, too. 

P.S. I recently chatted with my friend, Chef AJ. You can find that conversation here. And you can now follow us on TikTok.

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!