

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      November 29, 2016
  


Last updated: 
  October 8, 2021
  
    • 3 min read
  




In this year of post-truth politics, it’s more important than ever to stand up for the science. A soda and dairy lobbyist has been tasked with helping set up the new Department of Agriculture, which sets nutrition policy and oversees the Dietary Guidelines for Americans. If a tobacco hack was setting up the Centers for Disease Control, what do you think they’d say about smoking?

So we may not be able to rely on the powers-that-be to deliver us lifesaving nutrition facts. If only there were some sort of website that could deliver the science directly… Please join me in supporting the evidence-based nutrition revolution! Donate now. 
 

Shopping for someone else but not sure what to give them? How about the gift of science with a DrGreger.org gift card (100% of proceeds go to NutritionFacts.org). Cards are available in three designs and come in denominations of $10, $25, $50, and $100. You can send them via e-mail or print them out and give them as a physical gift. Check them out here.

 

 

Ever been in a situation where the subject of diet or disease came up and you wish there were a quick and easy way to help them cut through all the nonsense out there? Well now you can! Help spread the message of dietary sanity with our brand new business cards. The two-sided card design features information about NutritionFacts.org and How Not to Die with links to our social media. Share them with friends, colleagues, patients, or anyone else you think could benefit from life-saving nutritional science. They are available at cost here.

 

Ever since I started NutritionFacts.org five years ago I’ve used the presentation software Keynote to create the videos (it’s kind of like the Mac version of Powerpoint). This is only because I didn’t have expertise in high-powered software like After Effects. To give the videos a more modern feel (while maintaining the professionalism) we’re considering working with someone skilled in these more advanced tools. There are lots of design companies and freelancers out there, but as a mission-driven organization we’d rather pay someone who’s passionate about this work. If that describes you, please submit a sample of your work here.


Volunteers keep NutritionFacts.org running! In addition to our usual roles for the Translations and Article Retrieval projects, we currently have several volunteer openings for writers, editors, Pinterest users, and tech support. For more information and to apply to help out, head to our volunteer opportunities page.




 


 

Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!