

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      April 23, 2020
  


Last updated: 
  March 20, 2024
  
    • 2 min read
  




A very generous donor has offered to match all donations up to $10,000. Donations can be made through this form. We realize these are unsettling and uncertain times for many, so we are keeping our upcoming webinar completely free (see below). If you are able to and would like to support our work, now is a great time to do so, thanks to this wonderful donor. 

But you don’t have to wait for the book to learn more about how we got into this situation and what we can do now. Check out these resources all about COVID-19 and pandemics: 

The digital download of videos from my 2nd pandemic webinar can be found here (free for a limited time). To be the first to see announcements of future webinars, be sure you subscribe to our newsletter.

 



 

Pandemics: History & Prevention

How to treat the cause by preventing the emergence of pandemic viruses in the first place (a video I recorded more than a decade ago when I was Public Health Director at the HSUS in Washington DC).

 

What Are the Best Foods?

A review of reviews on the health effects of animal foods versus plant foods.

 

 

Cut the Calorie-Rich-And-Processed Foods

We have an uncanny ability to pick out the subtle distinctions in calorie density of foods, but only within the natural range.



 

Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and today, April 23 is the day.

You can now find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio.

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!