

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      December 3, 2019



Last updated:
  March 20, 2024

    • 2 min read





Today is #GivingTuesday, kicking off the charitable season with a celebration of giving and philanthropy. We are continuing our tradition of offering a limited-edition calendar. This year’s calendar is titled Healthy for Life: Evidence-Based Inspiration for a Healthy 2020. Most of the quotes in the calendar come from my new book, How Not to Diet. I hope that they will give you a bit of inspiration and motivation to know how much power you have over your health every time you sit down to a meal.

The first 200 people to donate $100 or more using this form to keep my 501c3 nonprofit NutritionFacts.org alive and thriving will get a calendar in time for the new year. Don’t wait—we always run out within a day or two. UPDATE: Thank you so much for your support; all calendars have been claimed!

Speaking of the new book, it’s landing on shelves in just one week! If you want to get it before anyone else, be sure to pre-order your copy today. To see what kind of blood, sweat, and tears went into this book, check out the book trailer that went up on NutritionFacts.org yesterday. 

I also give a sneak peek of the book in my brand-new presentation that just went live: Evidence-Based Weight Loss. Watch it here. It’s also available for download, and as part of a complete collection of all of my live presentations, over on Dr.Greger.org (all proceeds go straight to NutritionFacts.org).

I’m excited to kick off my 2020 speaking tour in New York City on December 15. Check out all of my upcoming speaking dates here.

 


I was thrilled to be invited back into the London Real studio for another long-form interview with one of my favorite hosts, Brian Rose. You can watch that interview here. I was also honored to be back on a TEDx stage. Check out my new TEDx talk The Best Weight Loss Diet here.

I recently gave a series of webinars on fasting – Intermittent Fasting; Fasting for Disease Reversal; and Fasting and Cancer. They are all now available for download here. We’ve bundled them together at a discounted price, but you can still get them separately here. Some of these videos are already up on NutritionFacts.org, and the rest will be trickling out over the next couple of years. 

If you plan to do some holiday shopping on Amazon this year, you can support NutritionFacts.org at the same time by going to http://bit.ly/NFsmile. Android users can also support us through the Amazon shopping app. Simply follow these instructions to turn on AmazonSmile and start generating donations. These small donations add up; in the last year we have raised over $10,000 through Amazon Smile. 

(AmazonSmile is not currently available for iOS users.)

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
