

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      December 17, 2020



Last updated:
  March 21, 2024

    • 4 min read





Today is the start of our annual end-of-year fundraising drive. Year after year, more than half of our entire annual operating budget has been raised around these final few weeks of December, so we’ve come to count on your giving-season generosity to make a tax-deductible donation to keep NutritionFacts.org going and growing.

This year, we have a special opportunity: A very generous donor is matching the first $100,000 received. You read that right! You have the chance to have your contribution doubled!


I may be the face of NutritionFacts.org, but there’s a veritable army of volunteers and now more than a dozen staff behind the scenes. They help me churn through the thousands of studies a week to stay on top of the science and enable me to bring you daily videos and articles on the latest in evidence-based nutrition.

This is only possible because of you.

Did you know that annual access to even a single academic database like Web of Science can cost nearly $50,000? Every year, thousands of people step forward and make donations large and small to express appreciation for our work. Hundreds have even signed up to be monthly donors, which helps ensure a predictable steady stream of support. Please “root” for the facts by helping us fill the carrot! It’s a numbers game and even a gift of a single dollar can help.

There are many ways to support evidence-based nutrition. On the Donate Page, you can make a tax-deductible gift using a credit card or PayPal. You can also send a check made payable to “NutritionFacts.org” to PO Box 11400, Takoma Park, MD 20913. Federal employees can donate to NutritionFacts.org through the CFC workplace giving program with the designation number 26461.

Thank you for your support. We truly appreciate it!

 



Join Dr. Greger for a free, live, one-hour presentation on the recent EPIC-Oxford study findings that suggested plant-based eating has adverse effects on bone health. Is it true? And, if so, what is the mechanism and how can we best protect our skeletons into old age?

Tune in for this deep dive by going to our YouTube channel or Facebook page at 3pm ET on Friday, December 18. Dr. Greger will be streaming to both at the same time!

 



We are happy to welcome Lucy as our new Social Media Assistant. She comes to us after years of managing a small acupuncture clinic in her community. Lucy is passionate about health equity and drawn to the mission of NutritionFacts.org for this reason. She studied Environmental Studies at Lewis & Clark College in Portland, OR, and enjoys long bike rides and walks with friends, practicing yoga, and tries to read one or two books every week. Lucy currently resides in Minneapolis but tries to get out of Minnesota during the dark winter months as much as possible. 

 



Did you know you can get the daily video and blog posts delivered right to your email inbox? Choose your frequency: Daily Video emails come out Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, and Daily Blog emails land on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Or, you can opt for weekly or even monthly updates to package all of the information into fewer emails. Update your subscription here.

 

 



“I started working with NF in December 2012 after Dr Greger asked for volunteers at one of his speaking engagements. I have done numerous jobs over the years, but I currently enter all the content on the webpages for each video. I was truly honoured in 2018 by being invited onto the NutritionFacts.org Board of Directors. Helping others has always been a priority for me, and it is a great privilege to work with Dr Greger and observe close-hand his dedication to helping humanity regain and maintain their health. Choosing a favourite recipe is like choosing a favourite child–it can’t really be done! But, lately, I have been really into a BROL bowl (see the recipe in the brand new The How Not to Diet Cookbook!) with steamed spinach, green onion, garlic, and miso paste mixed in.”

 



Every month, I do a Q&A live from my treadmill, and today is the day.

Join on our Facebook page or YouTube channel at 3pm ET. I’ll be streaming to both at the same time!

You can find links to all of my past live Q&As here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company. 

And a little reminder that The How Not to Diet Cookbook is now available wherever you get your books. If you’ve gotten it already, we’d love to read your reviews on Amazon!

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
