

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      December 15, 2022



Last updated:
  December 15, 2022

    • 3 min read





Today is the start of our annual end-of-year fundraising drive. Year after year, more than half of our entire annual operating budget has been raised around these final few weeks of the year. For the third year in a row, an amazingly generous donor is matching dollar-for-dollar the first $100,000 raised. Make your contributions early to have them doubled! We count on your giving-season generosity to make a tax-deductible donation to keep NutritionFacts.org going and growing.

I may be the face of NutritionFacts.org, but a veritable army of volunteers and now more than a dozen full-time staff members work tirelessly behind the scenes. They help me churn through thousands of studies to stay on top of the science and produce videos, articles, webinars, infographics, guides, and much more, so we can bring you the latest in evidence-based nutrition. Access to even just a single academic database, like Web of Science, can cost up to $16,000 a year. The work we do is only possible because of you.

Every year, thousands of people step forward and make donations large and small to express appreciation for our work. Hundreds have even signed up to be monthly donors, which helps ensure a predictable and steady stream of support. Please “root” for the facts by helping us fill the carrot! It’s a numbers game; a donation of any amount truly helps.

On the Donate Page, you can make a tax-deductible donation using a credit card, PayPal, ACH, Google Pay, or Apple Pay. There is also an option for transferring stock, or you can simply send a check to NutritionFacts.org at PO Box 11400, Takoma Park, MD 20913. Federal employees can even donate through the CFC workplace giving program with designation number 26461.

Thank you so much for your support!

 

 This versatile loaf is a perfect green-light main course for your holiday dinner table. I like to use whatever grains I have on hand––usually my Basic BROL!––and pair this loaf with a side of steamed greens, sweet potatoes, and assorted veggies. Get the free recipe on NutritionFacts.org, and watch a video on how it’s made on our Instagram. 

 

The holidays are a time for celebrating and, for many, that includes cocktails, beer, and wine. But regular consumption of alcohol has some potentially serious side effects…besides the hangover. See how alcohol can impact long-term outlooks on liver health and cancer on our topic page. 

I love hearing stories of how my work has changed people’s lives. Thank you to Jay for sending in his transformative story. 

“I am a 25-year-old graduate engineering student, originally from India, but I have lived in the UK and USA for about six years now. I have been a vegetarian all my life. I consider myself one of the fittest guys in my peer group, playing soccer for four years at the collegiate level, and I recently completed a half marathon. Soon after, I got my first ever lipid panel test done just because I thought I should have a data point of my health. The results were shocking. My total cholesterol was 286, LDL 168, and triglycerides 402. I was in disbelief. How can someone who runs four times a week and plays soccer have such bad numbers?

Through a family friend, I came across the book How Not to Die. I read that book in two days and listened to every single talk Dr. Greger has on the internet. Soon after, I started following a strict whole food, plant-based diet. I got my lipid panel done again after just two weeks, and all of my numbers improved dramatically: Total cholesterol went from 286 to 230, LDL from 168 to 144, and triglycerides from 402 to 236. I am so thankful to Dr. Greger for his public service, and I have recommended all my friends get a copy of his book and open their eyes to the junk they are eating.”

 

The Potential Harm in Unnecessary Gluten-Free Diets – How might we prevent the inflammation from gluten-free diets?

 

 

How to Naturally Reduce Wrinkles with Food – Almonds are put to the test in a ​​randomized controlled trial for facial wrinkles.

 

 

Why All Athletes Should Eat Plant-Based Diets – Enhance athletic performance with diet.

Every month, I do a live Q&A right from my treadmill, and the next one is today, December 15!

At 3 pm ET, tune in on our Facebook page, YouTube channel, or (new!) directly on NutritionFacts.org. You can find links to past live Q&As here on NutritionFacts.org.

 

 

 

 

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
