

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      December 15, 2016
  


Last updated: 
  May 8, 2023
  
    • 3 min read
  




Today is the start of our annual end-of-year fundraising drive. Year after year, more than half of our entire annual operating budget has been raised around these final few weeks of the year. So we count on your giving season generosity to make a tax-deductible donation to keep NutritionFacts.org going and growing. 

One new expense we have for 2017 is me! I’ve given up my public health director day job to devote my life to NutritionFacts.org full time. I’ve always prided myself on never having taken a penny from the site, but I realize this work is my true calling. So now that I’m going to be drawing a salary from NutritionFacts.org, your support now includes helping me put kale on the table. All the proceeds from my books, DVDs and speaking engagements will continue to be funneled directly into the site. Please “root” for me by helping us fill the carrot.

On the Donate Page you can make a tax-deductible donation to using a credit card, Bitcoin, transferring stock, or by sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” PO Box 11400, Takoma Park, MD 20913.

If you have donated to NutritionFacts.org in the past please be on the lookout for an email tomorrow regarding our new personalized donor portal. You will be able to view your donation history, update your personal information, and even opt in to a birthday surprise starting in 2017! Please check it out here: https://nutritionfacts.org/donate/
 

We have lots of exciting things planned for 2017. We are revamping the website, including a bunch of new features including “Crashcourses in Nutrition” to help deepen your knowledge. We may even be able to start offering continuing medical education credit for physicians. (After all, How Not to Die is now being used as a textbook at graduate public health and medical schools!). One new addition starts today, my new audio podcast.

We commissioned a 10-episode pilot podcast series to run over the next 10 weeks and the first episode is available now. Now you can learn life-saving tips while you run, cook, or commute. To check out the trailer and subscribe (for free, of course, like everything else on NutritionFacts.org) go to our new podcast page. If folks find them useful I’ll make them a regular weekly feature. The podcast is being produced by Joseph Ram of Issues and Advocacy, LLC and Kerry Thompson of Thompson House Productions.

Happiest of holidays and a wonderful, healthful, fact-filled new year.

In health,

Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!