

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      June 18, 2020



Last updated:
  March 20, 2024

    • 2 min read





I’m thrilled to announce that after being released only in audio and digital format, my newest book, How to Survive a Pandemic, is now available for paperback pre-order and will be out on August 18. Pre-order it today! (As always, all proceeds from my books are donated to charity).

My videos on pandemics and COVID-19 are currently rolling out on NutritionFacts.org. But, if you want to see them all at once, you can get the digital download FREE for a limited time. Download the videos here.

If you haven’t seen it yet, we’ve put up a resource page all about COVID-19 with videos, links to my pandemic blog post and special Q&A sessions, my DIY hand sanitizer recipes, and more. Check it out here. I’ve also continued to do a bunch of interviews, with Dr. Neal Barnard of PCRM, and Rich Roll.

 

My next webinar on my latest vitamin B12 recommendations is happening June 26 at 2pm ET, and registration closes tomorrow, June 19. 

I’ll start out with a discussion of the symptoms of B12 deficiency and then explain how I arrived at what I consider the optimal dose of vitamin B12 supplements in children, adults, the elderly, and during pregnancy. I’ll clarify why cyanocobalamin (not methylcobalamin) is the best type of vitamin B12 supplement and address the data suggesting B12 supplements cause acne, bone fractures, and lung cancer. I’ll also cover the healthiest food sources of B12 for those who don’t want to take supplements. And of course, I’ll be answering your questions during the Q&A portion. I hope you’ll join me!

Update: Thank you to everyone who attended the webinar. The digital download of the videos from the webinar is now available on DrGreger.org.

 

After 12 years of putting out a DVD for every one of my 50+ volumes of videos (and before that VHS!), we are retiring these physical DVDs with a 20% off sale. This the last chance to grab any that you’d like to have, but don’t worry — we will still be offering the digital downloads of all past and future volumes. 

What’s the best type of pots and pans to use?

What to eat and what to avoid to lower the cardiovascular disease risk factor lipoprotein(a).

The next coronavirus pandemic may come from pigs not pangolins.

Every month I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and June 25 is the day.

You can now find links to all of my past live Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
