

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      August 27, 2020
  


Last updated: 
  March 21, 2024
  
    • 3 min read
  




My newest book, How to Survive a Pandemic, is now out in paperback! This book cuts through the prevailing noise and nonsense and reveals not only what we can do to protect ourselves and our loved ones during a pandemic, but also digs deeper into the roots of the problem and tackles the fundamental question: How can we stop the emergence of pandemic viruses in the first place? 

All proceeds I receive from the book are donated to pandemic prevention charities such as the The Good Food Institute and the Plant Based Foods Association. Order your copy today!

My new volume is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately.

We kick it off next week, so click here to sign up today! 

 

 

 

 


More than 90% of stroke risk is attributable to modifiable risk factors.



Join on our Facebook page OR YouTube channel at 1pm ET.  I’ll be streaming to both at the same time!

You can now find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!