

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      October 21, 2021



Last updated:
  May 21, 2024

    • 3 min read





October is Breast Cancer Awareness month. Breast cancer is the most common internal cancer among women worldwide. Like many other diseases, the risk of breast cancer may be reduced through diet and lifestyle habits, such as exercising regularly and eating a plant-centered diet. For more information and all of the videos I have on this subject, visit the topic page. 

 

In the United States, Chinese takeout is often loaded with oil and sodium, but this version (from The How Not to Diet Cookbook) lets you enjoy the classic Szechuan stir-fry at home without all of that grease and salt. Customize this recipe with a variety of your favorite veggies to suit your taste and to take advantage of what you already have on hand. Get the free recipe here, and watch how it’s made on our Instagram.

Check out our green-light holiday recipe guide! Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive four recipes for your holiday meals.

 

 

There are two months left to get our limited-time NF Celebrates Diversity shirt or mug! We have long stressed the importance of dietary diversity. Each plant family has a unique combination of phytonutrients, which is one of the reasons I developed the Daily Dozen to encourage eating a variety of the very best foods each day for health and longevity. We also continue to share life-saving, life-changing science-based information to communities around the world, which is why everything on our website is free and all of our videos are translated into multiple languages. We’re thankful we get to take part in helping to make the world a more healthful place for everyone. All of the proceeds from the sale of our diversity shirt will support Food Empowerment Project, a nonprofit food justice organization.

 

I enjoy being a NutritionFacts.org volunteer. I help Dr. Greger with his social media pages so he can focus his time on research and writing. For more than seven years, I have been helping people find the answers they are looking for on the website, as well as inspiring others to fulfill their health desires.

My favorite recipe is an easy Asian-inspired cruciferous salad of shredded curly kale, Brussels sprouts, red and green cabbage, carrots, broccoli, and edamame. Top it with the juice of a lime, your favorite dressing, or a light peanut sauce, and add a small handful of raw peanuts and sesame seeds for a nutritious, hearty dish.

Our Spanish-language volunteer team is expanding, and we’re looking for a few more professional translators to join us. We have been translating new blogs and videos, as well as developing topic pages and other areas of NutritionFacts.org, to provide even more resources to Spanish speakers. Translation volunteers play an important role in helping us share life-changing and life-saving information in Spanish! For more information and to apply, go here.

 



 

How Low Should You Go for Ideal Cholesterol Levels?

Having a so-called normal cholesterol level in a society where it’s normal to drop dead of a heart attack isn’t necessarily a good thing.

 

The Side Effects of 3-MCPD in Bragg’s Liquid Aminos

Chlorohydrin contaminates hydrolyzed vegetable protein products and refined oils.

 

Hospitals with 100 Percent Plant-Based Menus

The American Medical Association has passed a resolution encouraging hospitals to provide healthy plant-based food options.

Every other month, I do a live Q&A from my treadmill, and it’s happening on Thursday, November 18!

Join on our Facebook page or YouTube channel at 3pm ET. I’ll be streaming to both at the same time!You can find links to past live Q&As here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember, I have an audio podcast to keep you company, too.

 

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
