

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      June 2, 2022



Last updated:
  December 20, 2022

    • 3 min read





It’s spring here in the United States, which, for millions of people, means allergy season. While you may be feeling lousy because your immune system is busily attacking allergens left and right, that same heightened state of alertness may have benefits for your overall health. Your immune system might be hard at work defending you against pollen and dust, but it could also be defending you against certain cancers. For more on that and on foods that can help reduce allergy symptoms, visit the allergies topic page.

 

Sweet potatoes, black beans, and spices are the stars of this Daily Dozen-inspired meal. Taquitos are excellent as a handheld main dish or a party-pleasing appetizer. Get the free recipe here, and watch a video on how they’re made on our Instagram. 

 

 

 

My new volume of videos is out now. This collection includes videos on hair loss, chemotherapy, an extended series on the sugar and meat industries’ influence on health and dietary guidelines, and more.

Each video in this new volume will be released online over the next few months, available for free, of course, but if you don’t want to wait, you can stream all of them right now. 

If you are a $15+ monthly supporter and opted in to our donor rewards, you’re likely an expert on these new topics by now, since you already received a complimentary link to the new download. If you’d like early access to new videos before they’re available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly supporter. Without your generosity, we wouldn’t be able to continue our work. Thank you!

And, remember, if you watch the videos on NutritionFacts.org or YouTube, you can access captions in several different languages. To find yours, click on the settings wheel in the lower-right corner of the video and then “Subtitles/CC.” Happy viewing!

 

In the 11 years since I started NutritionFacts.org, our library of resources has grown immensely. To help newcomers navigate all of our offerings, we just launched the brand-new Explore NutritionFacts.org page. Word of mouth from you, our devoted fans and subscribers, is one of the greatest ways people learn about NutritionFacts.org, so we hope this new page is a useful and shareable resource for you, as well. 

 

 

I help create citations for the articles Dr. Greger uses in his videos. I love evidence-based medicine and am driven to help make sure that nutrition information is accurate and free of marketing hype. Dr. Greger’s stance on facts and information that is free of conflicts of interest inspires me to keep helping in any way I can.

There are so many plant-based recipes I enjoy. One of my favorites is a tofu or edamame poke bowl because of how versatile they are. You can easily change the ingredients but still end up with a reliably delicious and filling meal. On top of that, they are super easy to batch cook and store for a quick grab-and-go lunch or dinner.

 



Blocking the Cancer Metastasis Enzyme MMP-9 with Beans and Chickpeas Which legumes are best at inhibiting the matrix metalloproteinase enzymes that allow cancer to become invasive?

 

 

Ultra-Processed Junk Food Put to the Test What happened when ultra-processed foods were matched for calories, sugar, fat, and ﬁber content in the first randomized controlled trial?

 

 

How Much Cancer Does Processed Meat Cause? I quantify the risks of colon and rectal cancers from eating bacon, ham, hot dogs, sausage, and lunch meat.

 

 

In health,

Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
