

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      December 29, 2020



Last updated:
  March 22, 2024

    • 2 min read





Thanks to your generosity, we have hit our goal! Without your support, I wouldn’t be able to spend my days digging into all of the best research and deliver it straight to you. NutritionFacts.org gets royalties from my books, but the number one funding stream that keeps us thriving is individual contributions from people like you. A huge thank you/gracias/cheers/xièxiè/dankie/merci from all our staff scattered across the globe in six countries.

Thanks to the collective enthusiasm for sharing NutritionFacts.org by our 3 million subscribers and followers, we averaged 3.5 million page and almost 2 million video views per month this year. But it’s not about the numbers; it’s about the people whose lives we’ve touched, changed, or even saved. A heartfelt thank you to everyone who has made this public service possible.

Please consider investing in my work by making a tax-deductible donation to NutritionFacts.org, using a credit card or PayPal, or you can send a check to: NutritionFacts.org, PO Box 11400, Takoma Park MD 20913.

 

As you get ready for 2021 and healthy resolutions, remember we have a free downloadable guide that summarizes my Traffic Light and Daily Dozen systems, as well as tips and simple recipes. Get your free download here, or order hard copies here at cost.

 

 

 



How to Reverse Heart Failure with Diet

Can you reverse heart disease with food? An entire issue of a cardiology journal dedicated to plant-based nutrition explores the role an evidence-based diet can play in the reversal of congestive heart failure.

 

Flashback Friday: Chocolate and Stroke Risk

Dark chocolate is pitted against milk chocolate in a test of artery function.

 

 

Do Vitamin B12 Supplements Cause Bone Fractures and Lung Cancer?

The connection between B12, bone health and cancer. What do randomized controlled trials of high-dose daily vitamin B12 supplementation show about the effects on cancer risk, death, and longevity?

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
