

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      February 13, 2020



Last updated:
  March 20, 2024

    • 4 min read





Today is the last day to register for my upcoming webinar: Why Do Vegetarians Have Higher Stroke Risk?

Date and Time: February 19, 2-4pm ET
Last Day to Register: February 13, TODAY

Given that high blood pressure and inadequate fruit and vegetable consumption are among the most important stroke risk factors, you would assume those eating plant-based diets would be at significantly lower risk, just as they are with heart attacks. You might be surprised to learn that there had never been any studies on the incidence of stroke in vegetarians, though…until now. And if you think that is surprising, wait until you hear the results. Yes, they had lower heart disease risk as expected, but those eating meat-free diets appeared to have more stroke risk. If that is indeed the case, what might be the cause, and what can we do about it?

To see the list of topics I’ll cover, go here.

UPDATE: Get the download of this webinar here, and to be the first to see announcements of future webinars, be sure you subscribe to our newsletter.

The videos from my most recent webinar, What Triggered the Obesity Epidemic?, are now available for digital download here. 

In fact, all of my previous webinars are available:

Our Spanish team is looking for a few experienced translators to work on translating and editing transcripts, blog posts, and video subtitles. Applicants should be proficient in both Spanish and English, with previous translation experience and a basic understanding of NutritionFacts.org content and medical terms. Go here to apply.  

I want to make sure everyone knows that my B12 supplement recommendations have changed based on new research. The most up-to-date info can always be found on my Optimum Nutrition Recommendations page, but here they are for easy reference: 

I’ve got a series of new videos coming out explaining the changes that will be featured in an upcoming webinar—stay tuned!

My dear friend and colleague, Dr. Neal Barnard, just released his new book. Your Body in Balance on how foods affect our hormones and the simple dietary changes that can help. This book provides step-by-step guidance on how specific foods can help with infertility, cramps, endometriosis, PCOS, hot flashes, and erectile dysfunction, as well as breast and prostate cancer through evidence-based dietary change. It also discusses how foods affect our weight, mood, and overall health. Learn more here.

Harness the power of your circadian rhythms for weight loss by making breakfast or lunch your main meal of the day.

 

Eat More Calories in the Morning to Lose Weight


A calorie is not a calorie—it not only depends on what you eat, but when you eat.

 

Benefits of Grapes for Brain Health

Grape juice and whole grapes are put to the test for brain function, including cognitive decline in early Alzheimer’s.

Thanks to the launch of How Not to Diet, I’ve been doing tons of interviews in between my speaking engagements (including Rochester, MN, Savannah, and Lakeland, FL, to name just a few). Check out this recent one on The Wellnest blog for an overview of what’s in the new book! 

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
