

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      October 17, 2019



Last updated:
  March 20, 2024

    • 2 min read





Tomorrow is the last day to sign up for the final webinar in my 3-webinar series on fasting, that will take place on October 25 at 2pm ET (my birthday)! In this session, Fasting and Cancer, I will focus on fasting for cancer as both an adjunct to chemotherapy and as a potential treatment in and of itself. I will also cover fasting for detoxing from chemical pollutants and pros and cons of using VSED—voluntarily stopping eating and drinking—to take control of the end of your life. Read more about the webinar here. 

To join the October 25 webinar: Make a donation through this form and we will send you a link to register for the webinar. Registration for this third and final webinar closes at midnight on October 18.

The first two webinars are now available as digital downloads; get them here: Fasting for Weight Loss (Intermittent Fasting) and Fasting for Disease Reversal. 

How Not to Diet is landing in less than two months, and I can’t wait for people to get their hands on this life-changing book. It was the single-biggest research project I’ve ever taken on, and I’m thrilled to give you a little sneak peek by offering the preface for download. Feel free to share this page with friends and family so they can subscribe to get in on the fun. 

I also recently sat down to chat about the book with Plant-Based News, and you can see that interview here. 

Ever wish medical students could be exposed to evidence-based nutrition? With your help they can! Donate to support Dr. Klaper’s quest to speak at all of the medical schools and inform an entire new generation of doctors. He’s one of my heroes!

My 2016 presentation, How Not to Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, & Reversing Our Top 15 Killers, is now available on Amazon Prime, free to watch with Prime membership in the US and UK. I’m excited for the opportunity to reach even more people through this platform. 

How the egg industry funded a study designed to cover up the toxic trimethylamine oxide reaction to egg consumption.

Are Keto Diets Safe? 

The effects of ketogenic diets on nutrient sufficiency, gut flora, and heart disease risk.

How many fewer calories do you have to eat every day to lose one pound of body fat?

Unfortunately, I have to cancel this month’s scheduled Q&As. Apologies, and see you on November 27.

You can now find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio.

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
