

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      January 16, 2020
  


Last updated: 
  March 20, 2024
  
    • 3 min read
  




I’m excited to announce my next webinar, taking place on February 19: 

Why Do Vegetarians Have Higher Stroke Risk?

Unlike the obesity webinar, which was put together mostly just to satisfy the intellectual curiosity of fellow nutrition nerds (more info below!), my February webinar is going to be of a more practical nature. Given that high blood pressure and inadequate fruit and vegetable consumption are among the most important stroke risk factors, you would assume those eating plant-based diets would be at significantly lower risk, just as they are with heart attacks. You might be surprised to learn that there had never been any studies on the incidence of stroke in vegetarians, though…until now. And if you think that is surprising, wait until you hear the results. Yes, they had lower heart disease risk as expected, but those eating meat-free diets appeared to have more stroke risk. If that is indeed the case, what might be the cause, and what can we do about it? I hope you’ll join me for this important event. For more information and to register, go here.

Date and Time: February 19, 2-4pm ET
Last Day to Register: February 13

 

Today is the last day to register for my next webinar on January 24 at 2pm ET:

What Triggered the Obesity Epidemic? 

The obesity epidemic exploded throughout the industrialized world in the late 1970s. What happened? Any potential driver would have had to be global in nature and coincide with the upswing of the epidemic. So how do the various theories stack up? Was it the fat, the sugar, our genes, lack of exercise? If you are as curious as I was before I dived in, I hope you’ll join me as I sift through the possibilities and answer your questions in this 2-hour live webinar, which is (*spoiler alert*) based on the first part of my new book How Not to Diet. 

Update: Get the download of this webinar here, and to be the first to see announcements of future webinars, be sure you subscribe to our newsletter. 

And speaking of my new book, I was thrilled to be back on Live with Kelly and Ryan and Fox Business to discuss it. 

 

I’ve started my 200-city speaking tour. This will take me all over the US and other parts of the world. Here are a few of the upcoming events that are open to the public. You can also see the full list here.

1/12/2020 Loma Linda, CA
Loma Linda University School of Medicine 

1/17/2020 Sedona, AZ
L’Auberge de Sedona for Health and Nutrition Conference & Sedona Performing Arts Center for VegFest

2/7/2020 Boise, ID
Plant Based in Boise

2/16/2020 Camarillo, CA
Whole Conference

2/21-2/28/2020
Holistic Holiday at Sea

 

We’re currently seeking volunteers with experience in English-Chinese translation and editing as we continue to bring the latest research on nutrition to people in Chinese-speaking regions. You can find the volunteer position descriptions and applications here. 

Over 30 How Not to Die Screening events have taken place around the world since last April. These events have brought communities together and have allowed this life-saving information to effectively reach wider audiences. Consider hosting a free event in your area. For more information and to apply, go here. 

The international medical organization Physicians Association for Nutrition (PAN International) is calling all health professionals supportive of a plant-based diet to add themselves to their latest website feature: an interactive map and list where patients around the globe can identify supportive practitioners near them. If you are a physician, physician assistant, registered dietician, or a nurse practitioner, please visit their website and consider adding your practice to the list!

 



 



Are Pre-Cut Vegetables Just as Healthy?

Endotoxins can build up on pre-chopped vegetables and undermine some of their benefits.

 



Are BCAA (Branched-Chain Amino Acids) Healthy?

Why we may want to strive not to exceed the recommended intake of protein.

 



Is Breakfast the Most Important Meal for Weight Loss?

Is the link between breakfast skipping and obesity cause-and-effect?

 



 

Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and January 23 is the day.

You can now find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio.

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!