

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      October 17, 2011



Last updated:
  February 7, 2022

    • 3 min read





The genesis of NutritionFacts.org dates back to more than a decade ago. Like most doctors, I went into medicine because I wanted to help people, but found myself in some hospital-based practice often dispensing drugs to counteract the side-effects of other drugs I had originally prescribed just to ease symptoms or tweak some risk factor. Meanwhile, bed after hospital bed was filled with people with preventable conditions—emphysema, diabetes, heart disease. I wanted to get to the root cause of the problem; I yearned to practice medicine on a broader scale.

So I started traveling the country speaking at medical schools, hospital grand rounds, and community groups about preventive and lifestyle medicine. Maxing out at 40 talks a month, I (and my family!) soon realized that this perpetual speaking tour was unsustainable. So I started writing books and, five years ago, started recording an annual Latest in Clinical Nutrition DVD, scouring the world’s scholarly literature for the most interesting, practical, and groundbreaking science published over the last 12 months on how best to feed ourselves and our families to prevent, treat, and even reverse chronic disease.

Last year, one of the DVDs caught the attention of the Jesse and Julie Rasch Foundation, who, to help fulfill part of their public health mission, offered to put all of my DVDs online. And thanks to them, a year later NutritionFacts.org was born. The site launched August 2011 preloaded with videos from the first four volumes of my Latest in Nutrition DVD series, and over the last two months has been featuring a new daily video from volume 5, the last of which just went up on Friday. So today we’re unveiling the first video off the new DVD. Eventually (by the end of the year), all videos off of volume 6 will be up on the site, but if you want a sneak peek at what’s to come, would rather watch them straight through, or want to share them as gifts you can purchase the Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 6 DVD now or through Amazon.

Here’s the list of chapters off the new DVD, a preview of what’s to come on NutritionFacts.org:

1.      Is Alkaline Water a Scam?
2.      Is Potassium Sorbate Bad for You?
3.      SAD State of Affairs
4.      Corporate Guidance for the Dietary Guidelines
5.      With a Grain of Big Salt
6.      He Who Pays the Piper Calls the Tune
7.      USDA Conflicts of Interest
8.      Just Say No
9.      Dietary Guidelines for Americans: The First 25 Years
10.    Dairies to Berries
11.    It’s All Greek to the USDA
12.    Package Deals
13.    Science Versus Corporate Interests
14.    Advisory Committee Conflicts of Interest
15.    Dietary Guidelines for Americans: 2010
16.    Progressing from Pyramid to Plate
17.    Food Fight
18.    A Doctor a Day Keeps the Apples Away
19.    If All Else Fails
20.    Doctors Without Orders
21.    Nutrition Bill Doctored in the California Senate
22.    Medical Associations Oppose Bill to Mandate Nutrition Training
23.    Dr. McDougall Champions California Senate Bill 380
24.    Infant Nearly Killed by Homeopathy
25.    Total Recall
26.    U.S. Meat Supply Flying at Half Staph
27.    Airborne MRSA
28.    MRSA in U.S. Retail Meat
29.    Amyloid and Apple Juice
30.    The Nutrition Facts Missing from the Label
31.    Best Fruit Juice
32.    Constructing a Cognitive Portfolio
33.    Alzheimer’s and Apple Juice
34.    Is Pomegranate Juice that Wonderful?
35.    Pink Juice with Green Foam
36.    Vitamin D Recommendations Changed
37.    Evolutionary Argument for Target Vitamin D Level
38.    Is Vitamin D the New Vitamin E?
39.    Vitamin D and Mortality May Be a U-shaped Curve
40.    Vitamin D Supplements May Be Necessary
41.    The Difficulty of Arriving at a Vitamin D Recommendation
42.    How the Institute of Medicine Arrived at Their Vitamin D Recommendation
43.    Resolving the Vitamin D-bate
44.    Take Vitamin D Supplements with Meals
45.    The Risks and Benefits of Neti Pot Nasal Irrigation
46.    Dying Under Normal Circumstances
47.    Agribusiness Sees It Differently
48.    Purely a Question of Diet
49.    Do You Want Fries with That? Lipitor?
50.    Tolerable Upper Intake of Zero

 -Michael Greger, M.D.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
