

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      September 5, 2013



Last updated:
  September 5, 2023

    • 2 min read



          Image Credit: chumsdock / Flickr.  This image has been modified.

Rooibos, or red tea, is anecdotally reported to aid stress-related symptoms, but it has none of the mood-altering phytonutrients thought responsible for the increased calm and decreased stress after drinking green tea (see Dietary Brain Wave Alteration). So why do some people feel less stressed drinking red tea?

Researchers recently found that human adrenal gland cells in a petri dish produce about 4 times less steroid hormones in the presence of red tea. This could certainly result in lower stress hormone levels if it happened within the body, but the effect was so dramatic the researchers were concerned it might adversely effect the production of sex steroid hormones as well. Thankfully, that’s not what they found when they tested it in human subjects. The same, however, may not be true of nettle tea.

Nettle is used to relieve the symptoms of prostate enlargement by boosting estrogen levels, but case reports show men drinking too much may grow breasts and women may actually start lactating. Nettle tea is safe as long as you 1) don’t drink too much, 2) don’t mistake it for deadly nightshade if you forage it, and 3) don’t put the leaves in your mouth fresh–they don’t call them stinging nettles for nothing! In my 3-min video Herbal Tea Update: Rooibos & Nettle I show a close-up of the impalement of a nettle spicule in the skin.

My go-to herbal tea is hibiscus (see my last article Hibiscus Tea: The Best Beverage?). But nettle tea is touted for being packed with minerals. That always seemed a bit strange to me. Yes, if you boil dark green leafy vegetables long enough, you do lose minerals into the cooking water, but how many minerals could we be getting if you just steep some tea? We never knew because it hadn’t been tested, until now.

Researchers compared the mineral content of nettle tea to chamomile tea, mint tea, St. John’s Wort, and sage. If you watch the video you’ll see that nettle tea didn’t seem to have much more than any of the others, but maybe they’re all really high?

One cup of nettle tea has the same amount of iron as dried apricot, the zinc found in a single pumpkin seed, one-twentieth of a mushroom’s worth of copper, and 4 peanuts’ worth of magnesium and a fig’s worth of calcium. I agree with the researchers that a cup of herbal tea may not be an important source of minerals, but it’s not negligible. Greens are so packed with nutrition that we can benefit by just drinking some hot water they’ve been soaking in for a few minutes.

The fact that so much nutrition leaches into the water in nettle tea is a reason we don’t want to boil greens unless we’re making soup or otherwise consuming the cooking water. See Best Cooking Method for more tips on preserving nutrients.

-Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my videos for free by clicking here and watch my full 2012 – 2015 presentations Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death, More than an Apple a Day, From Table to Able, and Food as Medicine.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
