

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      July 23, 2020



Last updated:
  March 21, 2024

    • 3 min read





Show off your love for NutritionFacts.org with these limited-edition products!  This summer, we’ve got brand new designs on a tee, tank, and mask. Funds raised help my team and I continue to bring you the bite-sized lifestyle medicine information you count on. Get the swag here. 


In my new book How to Survive a Pandemic and my last COVID-19 webinar I marveled at the constellation of new consumer choices in the dairy and meat aisle helping to innovate us out of our precarious situation with regards to the pandemic threats posed by animal agriculture. Plant-based meats, milks, and egg products—as well as even more pioneering approaches involving cellular agriculture—could also offer enormous benefits for the climate crisis. But what are the nutritional and personal human health effects of eating products like Beyond Meat and the Impossible Burger, or even actual animal products grown without the animals?
 
I did a deep dive and crafted a dozen videos on the topic that I’m going to unveil in a 2-hour live webinar with Q&A at 2pm ET on August 26:
 
1.   The Environmental Impacts of Plant-Based Meat Alternatives
2.   Are Beyond Meat and the Impossible Burger Healthy?
3.   Are Pea and Soy Protein Isolates Harmful?
4.   Plant-Based Meat Alternatives Put to the Test
5.   The Health Effects of Mycoprotein (Quorn) Products
6.   What About the Heme in Impossible Burgers?
7.   Does Heme Iron Cause Cancer?
8.   Heme-Induced N-Nitroso Compounds and Fat Oxidation
9.   Is Heme the Reason Meat Is Carcinogenic?
10. The Human Health Effects of Cultivated Meat: Food Safety
11. The Human Health Effects of Cultivated Meat: Antibiotic Resistance
12. The Human Health Effects of Cultivated Meat: Chemical Safety
 
All of these videos will eventually be available for free on NutritionFacts.org, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch it all now by joining me in this live webinar and get your burning questions answered.

UPDATE: The digital download of this webinar’s videos is now available here.

Last day to register: August 19th
Webinar date & time: August 26th, 2pm ET
 
And if you missed my last webinar on my latest B12 recommendations, you can now get the digital download of those videos.

If you haven’t seen it yet, we’ve put up a resource page all about COVID-19 with videos, links to my pandemic blog post and special Q&A sessions, my DIY hand sanitizer recipes, and more. Check it out here. 

My 17-video series on COVID-19 is wrapping up, so you can now see all of the videos on the topic page.

And I recently did an interview with The Daily Mail for their article on factory farms and pandemics: read it here. 


New subscribers to my newsletter will be receiving an infographic on the latest fasting research. You can sign up here. 


Join me for a live Instagram Q&A with one of my favorite dietitians and dearest friends, Julieanna Hever.
Head over to the NutritionFacts.org Instagram page on 8/17 at 3pm ET to get the answers to your health and nutrition questions.

 

 

 





How to Avoid COVID-19

COVID-19 prevention, and how long can the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus survive on surfaces like paper?

 

 



Where Did the COVID-19 Coronavirus Come From?

The role wet markets, wildlife trafficking, and pangolins have played in the emergence of SARS-CoV-2.

 

 



COVID-19 Symptoms vs. the Flu, a Cold, or Allergies

What does clinical course of COVID-19 look like for both those who survive and those who don’t? How the symptoms compare to the flu.

 

 

Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and today is the day. Thanks to a new software we are using, I can now stream to both places at once!

You can now find links to all of my past live Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio. 

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
