

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      July 6, 2017



Last updated:
  September 22, 2021

    • 3 min read





My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. In this new volume, I have videos on treating metastatic cancer with diet, coconut oil and candida; but, the focus is on arsenic in rice: which brands and types of rice are the safest, what’s the best way to cook it to reduce arsenic exposure, and questioning whether the benefits of even whole grain brown rice outweigh the risks. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now. 

Here’s the full list of chapters from the new volume—a preview of what’s to come over the next few months here on NutritionFacts.org:

Order my new DVD as a video download/streaming at DrGreger.org/collections/downloads, or on Amazon here. All proceeds go to keeping the site going and growing.

If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be an arsenic expert, having already received a link to the new DVD. New DVDs are released every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.

Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor will receive the next three downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, your choice). If you signed up for physical copies, you should have already received this volume, but if not please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better.

I’m so excited to announce that I just taped my first TV special last week, which should premiere on PBS in select cities in August and then go nationwide in October or December. As soon as I know more details, I’ll let everyone know!

If you are a nutrition or medical professional and are interested in helping out on the site, we’d love to bring you on as a volunteer moderator, helping millions to achieve a healthier lifestyle with evidence-based nutrition. Apply here.



Every month now I’m doing Q&As live from my treadmill, and July 27th is the next one.

 

If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio/

In health,

Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
