

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      May 26, 2020
  


Last updated: 
  March 20, 2024
  
    • 3 min read
  




How to Survive a Pandemic is now out! Note: if you checked on Amazon and noticed the Kindle and paperback versions were not available before, they are now! Join my email list to receive the preface of the book for free. 

I have a feeling many think How Not to Die is my first book, but it’s actually my 4th. Before I started NutritionFacts.org and switched to working on chronic disease, I had a career as Public Health Director at HSUS in Washington, DC specializing in emerging infectious disease. It was in that role that I was invited to defend Oprah, appeared on the Colbert Report, lectured at NIH and the Conference on World Affairs, and got to testify before Congress.

With my How Not to Diet book tour suspended, the COVID-19 crisis allowed me an opportunity to draw on my past expertise to fast-track this new book. 

If you haven’t seen it yet, we’ve put up a resource page all about COVID-19 with videos, links to my pandemic blog post and special Q&A sessions, a DIY hand sanitizer recipe, and more. Check it out here. And I’ve been doing a bunch of interviews lately, notably one with Moby and Joaquin Phoenix that you can watch here, as well as an article from Vox. 

On June 26th I’m going to be doing a 1.5-hour live webinar to explain the rationale for my new vitamin B12 recommendations and answer any questions you may have. I’ll start out with a discussion of the symptoms of B12 deficiency and then explain how I arrived at what I consider the optimal dose of vitamin B12 supplements in children, adults, the elderly, and during pregnancy. I’ll clarify why cyanocobalamin (not methylcobalamin) is the best type of vitamin B12 supplement and address the data suggesting B12 supplements cause acne, bone fractures, and lung cancer. I’ll also cover the healthiest food sources of B12 for those that don’t want to take supplements. I hope you’ll join me!

Register by making a donation of any amount through this form.

Registration ends: June 19
Webinar date & time: June 26, 2:00-3:30pm ET

 

 

 



COVID-19 Live Q&A

Replay of my COVID-19 Q&A last month.

 

 

Benefits of Quinoa for Lowering Triglycerides

How does the nutrition and health benefits of quinoa compare to whole grains, and does it aid in lowering triglycerides?

 

The Role of Processed Foods in the Obesity Epidemic

The rise in the U.S. calorie supply responsible for national weight gain and the obesity epidemic wasn’t just about more food, but a different kind of food – processed food.

 

Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and Thursday, May 28 is the day.

You can now find links to all of my past live Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio.

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!