

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      March 21, 2019



Last updated:
  March 20, 2024

    • 2 min read





In January we launched the Evidence-Based Eating Guide, which is available for free download here. Today I’m excited to announce that you can now order hard copies of the guide at-cost over on DrGreger.org. The guide is a run-down of my practical tips in booklet form, including summaries of my Traffic Light system and Daily Dozen checklist, as well as tips for putting them into practice.

As a current subscriber, you can also download digital PDFs: here’s an online version, and a fewer-page printable version (best when printed single-sided). 

Now that there are physical copies, hopefully you’ll see stacks in a doctor’s office near you!

 

You can support NutritionFacts.org with Amazon Smile. Sometimes it’s easy to forget to type in smile.amazon.com before shopping at Amazon. To make sure you never forget, please consider using Smilematic, a free browser extension that ensures your Amazon purchases will be able to support NutritionFacts.org.

And we’ve teamed up with Giving Assistant to make it easier to donate and to also help you save money when you shop online. Simply sign up through this link, download the browser extension, and when you save by shopping online at over 3,000 stores, you can give a percentage of your savings to NutritionFacts.org. 

 

The Gianna Simone interview was so popular I thought I’d start sharing some of my interviews to pass along to curious friends and family. Here’s a recent article in the Hong Kong Tatler and an interview on the Elite Man Podcast.

Speaking of spreading the message, I’m currently planning my 2020 speaking tour. If you want to set up a venue in your community for me to come speak, just fill out the form here and we will be in touch. And thank you to everyone who submitted a form already. We are going through those and will be in touch. I can’t wait to see you all!

 

I’m back to doing monthly Q&As live from my treadmill, and April 25 is the next date.

You can now find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio.

In health,

Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
