

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      July 31, 2012



Last updated:
  April 1, 2024

    • 2 min read





The current batch of videos from volume 9 are about to run out, so starting this week and running through October I’ll be rolling out the videos off my new Latest in Clinical Nutrition DVD, volume 10. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share as gifts, but there’s nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up online free at NutritionFacts.org.

The Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 10 DVD is available for purchase now (also on Amazon). In addition, to commemorate my tenth volume, I’ve packaged all ten into a complete 12-disc DVD set that is also available (and on Amazon too).

Here’s the list of chapters off the new volume 10 DVD — a preview of what’s to come here on NutritionFacts.org:

My last DVD, Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death, is already online in its entirety. It’s my attempt to squeeze all the most compelling (and entertaining!) findings published over the last 12 months on preventing, treating, and reversing our top 15 killers into a single video. If you find it valuable, please consider sharing it with those in your circles. Even if you’re not hooked into social media, you can click on the little envelope icon beneath the video to email it to friends and family (or just send them the link http://bit.ly/uprootingdeath).

And as always, if you haven’t already, you can subscribe to my free videos here.

-Michael Greger, M.D.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
