

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      June 9, 2015
  


Last updated: 
  April 5, 2024
  
    • 3 min read
  




The bowel movement videos are all scheduled to go up on NutritionFacts.org next month, but you can download and watch them right now.

The current batch of videos from volume 24 on NutritionFacts.org just ran out, so running until August I’ll be rolling out the videos from this new DVD, volume 25. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts, but there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up free online at NutritionFacts.org. If you’d like the works–40+ hours of video–you can get the complete DVD collection.

If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a bowel movement expert by now, having already received the new DVD. I now come out with new DVDs every 9 weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.

Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $15 monthly contributor will receive the next three DVDs for free (as physical DVDs, downloads, or both–your choice), and anyone signing up as a $25 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs. If you’re already signed up and didn’t receive your volume 25 yet, please email Tommasina@NutritionFacts.org and she’ll make everything all better.

If you’d rather just watch all the videos online here as they launch, but would still like to support my work of helping to educate millions about healthy eating, you can make a tax-deductible donation to my 501c3 nonprofit organization NutritionFacts.org using a credit card, a direct PayPal link, or by sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” PO Box 11400, Takoma Park, MD 20913.

Although there are already some great sites out there for free healthy recipes (like ForksOverKnives.com, StraightUpFood.com, and HappyHealthyLongLife.com), I’d love to feature some fan favorites on our Facebook and Google+ pages. Once we accumulate enough we can compile all the links onto a NutritionFacts.org recipe page to make it easier for everyone to put healthful eating into practice.

Just like the best drugs in the world don’t work unless you take them, the healthiest foods in the world don’t work unless you eat them. It’s my job to give you the best science as to the healthiest foods to eat; it’s your job to make them delicious. So get cooking!

Submit links to your favorite recipes to recipes@nutritionfacts.org.

I’m excited to share that NutritionFacts.org pages are now getting nearly 20 million hits a year, an average of more than 50,000 views a day. I’m so honored that so many find my work useful and worthy of sharing. Though even with 62 active volunteers (we love you!) and four dedicated full-time staff working overtime, you can imagine how overwhelmed we would be if even 1% of viewers contacted us. And indeed we field hundreds of requests daily.

Our current average response time is 47 hours, and as the traffic continues to grow, we’re afraid of falling even further behind. So we’ve created a Help Center to help solve common technical issues (in addition to our FAQ). We will continue to respond personally to any and all inquiries; this is just an additional resource to make your NutritionFacts.org experience as smooth and effortless as possible.

Speaking of smooth and effortless, I hope you enjoy my new bowel health videos!

-Michael Greger

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!