

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      January 7, 2013



Last updated:
  April 1, 2024

    • 2 min read





The current batch of videos from volume 11 on are set to run out soon here on NutritionFacts.org, so starting mid-month and running through April I’ll be rolling out the videos from this new DVD, volume 12. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share as gifts, but there’s nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up online free here at NutritionFacts.org.

The Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 12 DVD is available now with all proceeds going to keep NutritionFacts.org operational. If you’re in need of catching up, I’ve packaged the first ten volumes into a 12-disc DVD set.

Here’s the list of chapters off the new volume 12 DVD —a preview of what’s to come here on NutritionFacts.org:

Order the new DVD on my website or through Amazon.

January 1st marked the 500th day of his website’s existence. My heartfelt gratitude to all those who joined in the outpouring of support to keep NutritionFacts.org up and running. Unfortunately, I wasn’t able to raise enough to keep the site going at full capacity, which is why this is the first day since NutritionFacts.org started that there is no video-of-the-day.

In 2013, new videos will only appear every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday — but I’m going to start writing two blog posts a week, on Tuesday and Thursday, so if you’re subscribed to daily video and news updates you’ll still be able to enjoy new content every day.

Hopefully we’ll be able to raise enough funds this year that I can get back to a daily video schedule. All of my time is donated, but each video can entail charges for things like article and image licensing costs. If you value NutritionFacts.org, you can contribute to our 501c3 nonprofit charity with a credit card, through a direct Paypal link, or by sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” P.O. Box 11400 Takoma Park, MD 20913. You can now even involve the whole family at your child’s next birthday party through ECHOage — check it out!

Thanks again to all our wonderful supporters and may everyone have a happy and healthy new year.

-Michael Greger, M.D.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
