

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      August 4, 2016



Last updated:
  October 25, 2021

    • 5 min read





We now have evidence that as many as 37% of human breast cancer cases may be attributable to exposure to bovine leukemia virus. Coming up on NutritionFacts.org and available now in my new DVD are my three new videos on the shocking revelation:

I also have new videos queued on the paleo diet, resistant starch, and why vegans should consider taking DHA supplements. If you don’t want to wait, all of these videos are available now as a digital download as part of my new Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 32 (all proceeds go to charity). It can also be ordered as a physical DVD.

The current batch of videos from volume 31 are about to run out on NutritionFacts.org. So, starting next month and running until October, I’ll roll out the videos from this new DVD, volume 32. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts.  However, there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up free online at NutritionFacts.org. If you’d like the works—50+ hours of video—you can get the complete DVD collection.

If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a bovine leukemia virus expert by now, having already received the new DVD. I come out with new DVDs every 9 weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.

Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $15 monthly contributor will receive the next three DVDs for free (as physical DVDs, downloads, or both—your choice), and anyone signing up as a $25 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs. If you’re already signed up and didn’t receive your volume 32 yet, please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better.

If you’d rather just watch all the videos online as they launch, but would still like to support my work of helping to educate millions about healthy eating, you can make a tax-deductible donation to my 501c3 nonprofit organization NutritionFacts.org using a credit card, Bitcoin, a direct PayPal link, transferring stock, or by sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” PO Box 11400, Takoma Park, MD 20913.


How Not To Die is now also out in British, Hebrew, and Spanish editions. In September the German, Italian, Polish, and Serbian versions will be out, followed in November by Croatian, Czech, and Hungarian. In 2017, the book will finally be out in 19 other countries: Albania, Brazil, Bulgaria, China, Denmark, Finland, France, Japan, Korea, Mongolia, Netherlands, Portugal, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, and Vietnam.

Due to the overwhelming international interest in my work, we’ve decided to translate the entire website into other languages. With more than a thousand videos to translate, this is a huge undertaking and I need your help. Not only do we need dozens of volunteer translators for each language, but we need Translations Team Leaders to help coordinate these efforts. Even if you don’t speak other languages, if you are organized and have good interpersonal skills please consider applying to facilitate one of these translation projects so we can inspire as many people as possible to join the global evidence-based nutrition revolution! For other volunteer opportunities that arise, make sure to sign up for our volunteer newsletter.

Tomorrow is the launch of my 2016 annual presentation! It will appear as the NutritionFacts.org video-of-the-day on Friday, August 5th. It is the U.S. version of my London presentation, a best-of compilation of my last four year-in-review talks. Please help spread it far and wide to those within your circles that you think may benefit.

For me, NutritionFacts.org is a labor of love, a tribute to my grandma. We’re always trying to find ways to make it more user-friendly. Would you do me a favor? We set up a user survey so you can offer your thoughts on making the website as useful as possible. Please help us fix problems and brainstorm new features.


  Please do me the favor of filling out this NutritionFacts.org user survey.

I had so much fun doing live Q&A’s this month on Facebook and Twitter I’ve not only decided to make them monthly recurring events, but I’ve added a third on YouTube. So I’m going to be doing three live half-hour Q&A sessions on Thursday, August 25th 2016:

Hopefully between all three I’ll get all your questions answered—at least until next month!

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live year-in-review presentations Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death, More Than an Apple a Day, From Table to Able, and Food as Medicine.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
