

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      July 11, 2013



Last updated:
  May 21, 2024

    • 3 min read





The newest volume of my Latest in Clinical Nutrition DVD series launches today. Order on my website or through Amazon (all proceeds go to keeping NutritionFacts.org up and running).

The current batch of videos from volume 13 on NutritionFacts.org are set to run out soon, so starting mid-month and running through September I’ll be rolling out the videos from this new DVD, volume 14. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts. However, there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up online free at NutritionFacts.org.

If you’d like the whole (kale-filled) enchilada, I have a special on my complete DVD collection.

Here’s the list of chapters from the new volume 14 DVD — a preview of what’s to come on NutritionFacts.org:

If it looks appetizing, you can order the new DVD on my website or through Amazon

In the last two DVDs I cut the chapter menus so I could pack in more content, but folks missed the ability to navigate around to each individual topic. So although this DVD is only 113 minutes long, the chapter menus are back by popular demand!

Fundraising Update

At NutritionFacts.org, every day is Independence Day. Independence from advertisers, from sponsors, from paid subscriptions, and from commercial influence. Please help me keep the site free for all, for all time.

The DVDs bring in money to help keep NutritionFacts.org afloat. If you’re just going to wait to watch all the videos online individually — great! But please consider making a donation. Hundreds of viewers like you have already stepped up and helped out.

Between 2012 end-of-year giving and what I’ve been able to raise so far this year, I have funds sufficient to pay total operating expenses through to mid-September. At this point I was really hoping to be set through the remainder of the year, so I can spend less time worrying about fundraising and more time focusing on the research at hand. To make your contribution to NutritionFacts.org Inc. (the 501(c)3 nonprofit charity set up to support the site) you can use a credit card, use a direct Paypal link, or send a check to “NutritionFacts.org” P.O. Box 11400 Takoma Park, MD 20913.

Hundreds of thousands of people like you benefit every month from the free nutrition education they can get every day at NutritionFacts.org. Did you see the latest testimonial I posted last week? Read Fred’s inspiring story here.

I hope you’ll consider chipping in. On the donate page you have the option to sign up for monthly donations, which really help us budget for the future. Anyone signing up to make at least a $10 monthly donation will receive complimentary sneak preview copies of my next two DVDs before they’re released to the public.

Upcoming Conferences

This month join me at the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine’s International Conference on Nutrition and the Brain, where I’ll be speaking alongside two of my medical mentors, Drs. Neal Barnard and John McDougall.

Then this fall I’m excited to also join Drs. Ornish and Esselstyn at Lifestyle Medicine 2013.

The most groundbreaking event, though, is the inaugural North American Plant-Based Nutrition Healthcare Conference. How exciting is that!?

The rest of my speaking schedule can be found here.

I hope everyone had a happy healthy 4th of July!
-Michael Greger, M.D.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
