

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      April 11, 2013



Last updated:
  May 20, 2024

    • 2 min read





I’m excited to announce that last month the NutritionFacts.org podcast reached #1 on the iTunes health video podcast charts (subscribe here). What perfect timing to announce a new DVD!

The newest volume of my Latest in Clinical Nutrition DVD series launches today. Order on my website or through Amazon (all proceeds go to keeping NutritionFacts.org alive and kicking).

The current batch of videos from volume 12 on NutritionFacts.org are set to run out soon, so starting mid-month and running through July I’ll be rolling out the videos from this new DVD, volume 13. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts. However, there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up online free at NutritionFacts.org. If you’re in need of catching up, I’ve packaged the first ten volumes into a 12-disc DVD set.

Here’s the list of chapters from the new volume 13 DVD — a preview of what’s to come on NutritionFacts.org:

Order the new DVD on my website or through Amazon

The DVDs also function as a fundraiser for the operation of NutritionFacts.org. If you’re just going to wait to watch all the videos here online individually — great! But please consider making a donation. Between end-of-year giving and what I’ve been able to raise so far this year, we have funds sufficient to pay total operating expenses through to mid-August. I’m really hoping to achieve at least a six month buffer, so I can spend less time worrying about fundraising and more time focusing on the research at hand. To make your contribution to NutritionFacts.org Inc. (the 501(c)3 nonprofit charity set up to support the site) you can use a credit card, use a direct Paypal link, or send a check to “NutritionFacts.org” P.O. Box 11400 Takoma Park, MD 20913.

Hundreds of thousands of people like you benefit every month from the free nutrition education they can get every day at NutritionFacts.org. Have you seen some of the testimonials I’ve been posting on the NutritionFacts.org Facebook page? Read Devin’s story and David’s story. I hope you’ll consider chipping in. On the donate page you have the option to sign up for monthly donations, which really help us budget for the future. Anyone signing up to make at least a $10 monthly donation will receive complimentary sneak preview copies of my next two DVDs before they’re released to the public.

-Michael Greger, M.D.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
