

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      November 14, 2011
  


Last updated: 
  August 21, 2023
  
    • 1 min read
  


          Image Credit: Gullig / Flickr.  This image has been modified.          

This month in the journal Academic Medicine yet another editorial was published decrying the sorry state of nutrition knowledge in medical education, a problem diagnosed yet untreated for the last 50 years. What is the profession doing about it? This morning’s NutritionFacts.org video-of-the-day Medical Associations Oppose Bill to Mandate Nutrition Training exposes the fact that many mainstream medical organizations are actively opposing and lobbying against mandating more nutrition for doctors. This, despite the fact that most medical schools in the United States fail to provide even a bare minimum of nutrition training.

Thirty years ago, only about a third of medical schools required a single course on nutrition. That number has since dropped to only 1 in 4, as I showed in Wednesday’s Medical School Nutrition Education. No wonder doctors get failing grades in tests of basic nutrition knowledge about diet and heart disease, our #1 killer. More disturbing, the percentage of medical instructors that think this deficiency is a problem has also dropped over the last decade. In Thursday’s Doctors Know Less Than They Think About Nutrition, I profile a study that suggests arrogant overconfidence may play a role, concluding: “Simply put, doctors say they are knowledgeable but the majority of them are not.”

According to a review published last month in Nutrition in Clinical Practice, “virtually every published study about physicians and nutrition counseling showed that primary care physicians…were not delivering nutrition services to their patients.” There was one study of thousands of patient visits to more a hundred family physicians that measured how much nutrition advice they were offering. The average per visit? Less than 10 seconds.

Starting last Friday and continuing through this Thursday, I document Dr. John McDougall‘s quixotic battle against mainstream medicine to mandate even just a few hours of nutrition education for our colleagues.

-Michael Greger, M.D.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!