

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      April 4, 2017
  


Last updated: 
  August 30, 2017
  
    • 3 min read
  




Notice anything different? NutritionFacts.org just got a major redesign! The site was looking SO 2014, but the main reason we wanted to shake things up is to make the homepage more newbie-friendly.

Previously, the new video-of-the-day was featured front and center, which is great for those who already have a good understanding of the basics and just want the latest, but not ideal for those who just stumble onto the site. We get a ton of traffic from people doing Google searches for health and nutrition topics, but they may happen upon the site on a day we’re featuring the role of some obscure spice in treating some obscure cancer (Benefits of Turmeric Curcumin for Inflammatory Orbital Pseudotumor anyone?). This results in a high “bounce rate,” the proportion of people who come to the site, but then leave without clicking on anything or watching a single video.

Oh, that kills me.

They were SO close to getting life-saving information that could have helped them and their families. I’m still going to be posting new videos and articles every day; the home page has just been rearranged to feature some of the more introductory material for those new to the site.

We also wanted to add a bunch of improvements for die-hard fans (I’m looking at you!). So now there’s a new Favorites feature. You’re now able to add videos, blogs, and podcasts to your personal collection to view from your account. Let us know what you think and what other features you’d like to see.

The audio podcasts have also been redesigned, making it easier for new listeners to tune in right on the site, or subscribe using their favorite program or app, from every page.  We’re also improving our existing comment system to be more user-friendly and will continually add new functionality to make it easy to participate in conversations around the site. And we’re going to be updating our search functionality with find-as-you-type autocomplete and improved filters—we’re going to need it as the thousands of videos continue to pile up!

The next big leaps will be adding a Spanish-language option for the entire site and introducing my Crashcourses in Nutrition, self-directed study modules where you can learn about specific topics and test your knowledge (and maybe even compete for prizes!). Stay tuned for more…

We’ve had to move our original video podcast over to a new URL, so if you enjoy listening to the videos in podcast format, resubscribe here.

This is separate from our new audio podcast, which you can subscribe to here.

There was overwhelming interest expressed in signing up for the “How to Research a Health or Nutrition Topic” live online training I had suggested last month, and so we’re on. Mark your calendars for Saturday, May 6th from 1pm ET to 5pm ET and register here.

I’ll share all the tips I’ve learned over the years on how to gain access to and search medical databases, (legally) circumvent article paywalls, and stay on top of the research. Mostly I’ll just be running through sample search strategies for whichever foods or disease conditions the training participants (you!) are interested in. If four hours of that sounds like your idea of fun, sign up here.

I hope everyone likes the new look!

In health,

Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!