

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      September 7, 2017



Last updated:
  October 19, 2022

    • 1 min read





I am thrilled to announce the launch of Spanish-language NutritionFacts.org, availing hundreds of millions more people to the latest in evidence-based nutrition. Our muy fantástico Spanish Program Director, Diana Montejano, along with an army of interns and volunteers have been working hard for the past year to translate our video subtitles and pages. You’ll find more than 400 videos at https://nutritionfacts.org/es.  Right now, we are focusing on translating all of the new videos and as many older videos as possible. If https://nutritionfacts.org/es takes off, we will also considering translating the blogs as well. To toggle between English and Spanish, use the language switcher at the bottom of every NutritionFacts.org page.

Subscribe to receive our newsletter with the Spanish-language videos here. And be sure to follow us on our Spanish Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.

Watch me struggle to welcome all our new Spanish language viewers by clicking on the video:




 

Thanks to each and every one of you for helping us help so many.

-Michael Greger, M.D. FACLM


PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
