

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      March 18, 2021
  


Last updated: 
  March 21, 2024
  
    • 3 min read
  




I’m excited to share a recipe from The How Not to Diet Cookbook. If you’ve already made this dish, please leave us a comment on the recipe page or the Instagram post. I’d love to know what you thought about it!

Ribollita is a rustic Italian soup that, like most soups, tastes even better when reheated and served the next day, as the flavors are allowed to develop even more—hence the name ribollita, which means “reboiled.” Traditional ribollita contains Parmesan and chunks of crusty Italian bread, but this cleaner, more modern version skips the cheese and bread in favor of superstars kale and cabbage. This soup is delicious no matter when you enjoy it, but if you have time, try to prepare it a day before you plan to serve it so it’s truly a ribollita, a “reboiled” rustic soup.

Get the full recipe here, and check out the Instagram Reels video here.

 

Type 2 diabetes is almost always preventable, often treatable, and sometimes even reversible through diet and lifestyle changes. I have a wealth of information about this common disease on its topic page, which details key takeaways and all related videos.

 

 

 

We were honored to interview several Black health professionals last month and feature their stories on our social media pages. They told us about their work, their go-to whole food, plant-based meals, and what they would like people to know about Black health and Black History Month. Please check out the interviews using the social media links below, and stayed tuned for more in the coming weeks and months. 

 

We have great news for our Canadian supporters! You can now donate to NutritionFacts.org and receive a Canadian tax receipt through RC Forward, a project of Rethink Charity. Simply make a donation to us on our RC Forward page, and they will make sure you get the appropriate tax receipt. We appreciate your support.

 

Years ago, I did two webinars on all the tips I’ve learned about how to best search medical databases, legally circumvent article paywalls, and stay on top of the research. I also ran through sample search strategies for different nutrition topics. Those webinars were not available for downloading…until now! Check them out here.

 

 

 

We’re thrilled to announce that How Not to Diet has been translated into Spanish! This translation will be published under the title Comer para no engordar. Pre-orders have already started in Spain, and the book will release on April 14th. You will find more information and the links for several stores to pre-order on the publisher’s book page. You can find the availability of all translations of all of my books here. 

 

 



 

Dr. Greger in the Kitchen: Cran-Chocolate Pomegranate BROL Bowl 

Prebiotic goodness for breakfast to keep your microbiome happy all day long.

 

 

Flashback Friday: The Effects of Avocados on Inflammation

High-fat plant foods—avocados, peanuts, and walnuts—and olive oil are put to the test.

 

 

The Health Effects of Mycoprotein (Quorn) Products vs BCAAs in Meat 

Clinical trials on Quorn show that it can improve satiety and help people control their cholesterol, blood sugar, and insulin levels.

 

 


Every month, I do a live Q&A directly from my treadmill, and Thursday, March 25 is the day.

Join on our Facebook page or YouTube channel at 3pm ET.  I’ll be streaming to both at the same time!

You can find links to past live Q&As here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, don’t forget I have an audio podcast to keep you company, too.

 

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!