

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      March 3, 2022
  


Last updated: 
  August 21, 2023
  
    • 2 min read
  




Eating a healthy, plant-based diet doesn’t mean depriving yourself of sweet treats! Dates are a great whole-food sweetener. Try them in these delicious Oatmeal Cookie Dough Bites. They come together easily in a food processor for a quick and simple sweet snack. Get the free recipe here, and check out our Instagram for a video on how they are made.

 

According to the renowned Global Burden of Disease Study, high blood pressure is the leading risk factor for death in the world by contributing to various causes of mortality. So, what can we do to keep our blood pressure down? Check out the topic page for a summary and videos like How Not to Die from High Blood Pressure and How to Lower Blood Pressure Naturally. 

 

 

My new volume of videos is out now. This collection includes an update on bovine leukemia virus and breast cancer, a series on longevity, potassium chloride as a salt substitute, and much more.

Each video in this new volume will be released online over the next few months, available for free, of course, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch all of them by streaming right now. 

If you are a $25+ monthly supporter and opted in to our donor rewards, you’re likely already an expert on these new topics by now, since you already received a complimentary link to the new download. If you’d like early access to new videos before they’re available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly supporter. Without your generosity, we wouldn’t be able to continue our work. Thank you!

 



If you watch our videos on NutritionFacts.org or YouTube, you can access captions in several different languages by clicking on the settings wheel in the lower-right corner of the video. All of our videos are in English and have translated subtitles. They are viewed in nearly every country in the world! If you have a background in professional translation, please consider applying here.

We are especially seeking translators for: Dutch, French, German, Hindi, Hungarian, Italian, Simplified Chinese, Russian, Spanish, Tamil, and Vietnamese.

 

“I translate the videos and other content from English to Chinese. I enjoy working with the NutritionFacts.org team while learning healthy diet facts. I hope what we do here can help more people find their own paths to a healthy lifestyle. My favorite healthy food is tofu: The possibilities are unlimited!”

 

 

 



Foods That Cause Inflammation 

Inflammatory markers can double within six hours of eating a pro-inflammatory meal. Which foods are the worst?

 

Fighting the Ten Hallmarks of Cancer with Food 

The foundation of cancer prevention is plants, not pills.

 

 

Flashback Friday: Dr. Greger’s Daily Dozen Checklist

In my book How Not to Die, I center my recommendations around a Daily Dozen checklist of all the things I try to fit into my daily routine.

 

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!