

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      July 23, 2024



Last updated:
  July 23, 2024

    • 3 min read





The power of the “eat more” food environment can overcome our conscious controls.

Food and beverage companies frame body weight as “a matter of personal choice.” Even when we aren’t distracted, the power of the “eat more” food environment may sometimes overcome our conscious controls of overeating. One look around the room at a dietician convention can tell you that even nutrition professionals are vulnerable to the aggressively marketed ubiquity of tasty, cheap, convenient calories. This suggests there are aspects of our eating behaviors “that defy personal insight or are below individual awareness,” flying below the radar of conscious awareness. Appetite physiologists call the result of these subconscious actions “passive overconsumption.”

Remember that brain scan study where the thought of a milkshake lit up the same reward pathways in the brain as substance abuse? That was triggered just by a picture of a milkshake. Dopamine gets released, cravings get activated, and we’re motivated to eat. Intellectually, we know it’s just an image, but our lizard brain sees survival. It’s just a reflexive response over which we have little control, which is why marketers ensure there are pictures of milkshakes and their equivalents everywhere.

As I discuss in my video The Role of Personal Responsibility in the Obesity Epidemic, maintaining a balance between calories in and calories out feels like a series of voluntary acts under conscious control, but it may be more akin to bodily functions, such as blinking, breathing, coughing, swallowing, or sleeping. You can try to will yourself power over any of these, but by and large, they just happen automatically, driven by ancient scripts.

Not only are food ads ubiquitous, but so is the food. The types of establishments selling food products expanded dramatically in the 1970s and 1980s. Now, you can find candy and snacks at the checkout counters of “gasoline stations, building material outlets, auto parts stores, drug stores, and home furnishing stores” and more. The largest food retailer in the United States is Wal-Mart. You can get that jolt of “dopamine and the associated artiﬁcially induced feelings of hunger in modern society” around every turn. Every day, we run the gauntlet.

It’s also become “socially acceptable to eat food at any time of day and anywhere—in cars, in your hand, on the street—places where eating had never been acceptable.” We’ve become a snacking society. Vending machines are everywhere. Daily eating episodes seem to have gone up by about a quarter since the late 1970s, increasing from about four to five occasions a day, potentially accounting for twice the calorie increase attributed to increasing portion sizes. Snacks and beverages alone could account for the bulk of the calorie surplus implicated in the obesity epidemic.

And think of the children. Here we are trying to do the best for our kids, role-modeling healthy habits and feeding them healthy foods, but then they venture out into a veritable tornado of junky food and manipulative messages. A commentary in The New England Journal of Medicine asked: “But why should Mr. and Ms. G.’s efforts to protect their children from life-threatening illness be undermined by massive marketing campaigns from the manufacturers of junk food?” Pediatricians are now encouraged to have the “French Fry Discussion” with parents at the 12-month well-child visit instead of waiting until their kids are two—though even that may be too late. As you can see below and at 3:35 in my video, two-thirds of infants are being fed junk food by their first birthday. 



Dr. David Katz may have said it best in the Harvard Health Policy Review: “Those who contend that parental or personal responsibility should carry the day despite these environmental temptations might consider the implications of generalizing the principle. Perhaps children should be encouraged, but not required, to attend school and tempted each morning by alternatives, such as buses to the circus, zoo, or beach.” 

It may be helpful to take a step back and think of what’s at stake here. We aren’t just talking about being manipulated into buying a different brand of toothpaste. The obesity pandemic has resulted in millions of deaths and untold suffering. If you aren’t mad yet, brace yourself for my next video: The Role of Corporate Influence in the Obesity Epidemic.

This is the ninth video in my 11-part series. If you missed any of the previous ones, see the related posts below.

Despite our conscious efforts to control our eating behaviors, aspects of our consumption may occur subconsciously, driven by ancient biological scripts and environmental cues. This passive overconsumption can lead to the intake of excessive calories without full awareness. 

The pervasive presence of food advertisements and the availability of food products in establishments from gas stations to home improvement stores contribute to a dopamine-induced environment that triggers cravings and hunger cues, making it challenging to resist overeating and maintain a balance between calorie intake and expenditure.

Eating and snacking have become socially acceptable behaviors at any time and in any place, contributing to an increase in daily eating episodes. Vending machines and readily available snacks further exacerbate the calorie surplus implicated in the obesity epidemic.

Children are particularly vulnerable to the influence of food marketing and environmental factors. Despite efforts by parents to promote healthy eating habits, children are exposed to a barrage of junk food marketing and often consume unhealthy foods from an early age.

While personal responsibility is often emphasized in addressing obesity, the pervasive influence of food marketing and environmental factors complicates individual efforts to make healthy choices. Recognizing the broader societal influences on eating behaviors is essential in developing effective strategies to address the obesity epidemic. 

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
