

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      December 21, 2017



Last updated:
  September 18, 2023

    • 3 min read





There are some people who will never change, and God bless ’em. If they want to smoke cigarettes, go bungee jumping, it’s their body, their choice. But I think most people are just confused. They want to live long, healthy lives, want to take better care of their families, but are bombarded by billion dollar industries bent on sowing confusion in hopes people will just throw up their hands and eat whatever’s put in front of them. But the good news is that we have tremendous power over our health destiny and longevity—the vast majority of premature death and disability is preventable with a healthy enough diet and lifestyle. The science is in, but it’s being drowned out by commercial interests who may not have our family’s best interests at heart. I hope you consider me a partner in the struggle to get at the truth. Nearly 190,000 scientific papers on nutrition were published over the past year, about 500 a day. Please help us sift through all that science, so you… don’t have to!

Last week, we started our annual end-of-year fundraising drive. Year after year, more than half of our entire annual operating budget has been raised around these final few weeks of the year. So we count on your giving season generosity to make a tax-deductible donation to keep NutritionFacts.org going and growing.

We need to raise more than usual this year, because I need to take the next year off from speaking so I can concentrate on writing my next book, so that loss in speaking honoraria has to be made up in donations. Please “root” for the facts by helping us fill the carrot!

I may be the face of NutritionFacts.org, but there’s a veritable army of staff and volunteers behind the scenes. They help me churn through the thousands of studies a week to stay on top of the science, so we can bring you daily videos and articles on the latest in evidence-based nutrition. This is only possible because of you. Every year, thousands of people step forward and make donations large and small to express appreciation for our work. Hundreds have even signed up to be monthly donors, which helps ensure a predictable steady stream of support. It’s a numbers game; even a single dollar can help.

On the Donate Page you can make a tax-deductible donation using a credit card, Bitcoin, transferring stock, or by sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” PO Box 11400, Takoma Park, MD 20913.

I’m honored to say that the New York Times Review of Books called my new How Not to Die Cookbook their favorite cookbook of the season! Thanks to all your pre-orders we sold more than 25,000 copies on launch day, shooting it to an instant New York Times Besteller coming in at #3! All proceeds I receive from the sale of the cookbook go directly to NutritionFacts.org.

 



Thanks to the kind donation of Ana Victoria Esquivel’s gorgeous artwork, we now have Daily Dozen posters available. So if the cookbook isn’t enough, and you’re looking for other holiday gifts for the healthy people in your life (or soon to be healthy!), check it out. Perfect for hanging in a doctor’s office. Imagine walking into an exam room and seeing healthy food on the wall!

 



Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and Thursday, December 28th is the day.

Facebook Live: At 12:00 p.m. ET Thursday, December 28th, go to our Facebook page to watch live and ask questions.

YouTube Live Stream: At 1:00 p.m. ET Thursday, December 28th go here to watch live and ask even more questions! 

In health,

Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
