

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      December 16, 2021
  


Last updated: 
  December 13, 2021
  
    • 4 min read
  




Today is the start of our annual end-of-year fundraising drive. More than half of our entire annual operating budget is raised around these final few weeks of the year, and our goal is to raise $350,000. We count on your giving-season generosity to make a tax-deductible donation to keep NutritionFacts.org going and growing.

This year is the tenth anniversary of NutritionFacts.org. Before the organization was founded, I traveled around the country giving hundreds of presentations about lifestyle medicine each year. Then, the Jesse & Julie Rasch Foundation generously provided the seed money to launch the organization and website in order to reach even more people with this life-changing, life-saving information. Now, we rely on the support of individual donors like you. 

A lot has changed in the last ten years. Today, more than a dozen staff members keep the engines running. Just this past year, we hired four new positions to help expand our outreach and web development programs. 

This is all thanks to the support of our donors. As you know, there are no ads or corporate sponsors on NutritionFacts.org. Our supporters are truly the lifeblood of this organization. You enable us to do this work. Every year, thousands of people step forward and make donations large and small to express appreciation for our work. Hundreds have even signed up to be monthly donors, which helps ensure a predictable and steady stream of support. 

Please “root” for the facts by helping us fill the carrot during our year-end funding drive! It’s a numbers game; even a single dollar can help.

For the second year in a row, a generous donor is providing a $100,000 match. Make your contributions early to have them doubled! 

On the Donate Page, you can make a tax-deductible donation using a credit card or PayPal. You can also transfer stock or mail a check to NutritionFacts.org, PO Box 11400, Takoma Park, MD 20913. Federal employees can even donate through the CFC workplace giving program with designation number 26461.

 

“I was raised on the standard American diet, and by the time I was approaching 40, I hit my highest weight at 240. I can still remember that day. It’s when I’d had enough. I started to research nutrition, and your site was the first I came across. It changed my life. I have two young children, and I want to be around for them as long as I can without being a burden either. I lost my Mom at 43 and my Dad at 65, and I don’t want my kids to experience what I did. I also want to set a good example for them.

Now, at nearly 49 years old, I feel and look better than I have at any point in my life. People think I’m around 35. I can hike and bike for miles on end, run football routes with my 9-year-old son, and play basketball with him and his friends. When I was at my heaviest, my doctor wanted to put me on a statin; dietary changes were never mentioned. But, I wanted to fix it myself. My doctor now calls my lipid profile and blood work ‘remarkable.’ Learning about nutrition, calorie density, and plant-based diets is the single greatest self improvement I’ve ever done. And I thank you and all of your colleagues for the information to help me succeed. Hopefully I can influence the people around me, too!” –Jack

 



Although we should avoid processed chocolate due to the sugar content, cocoa has a number of health benefits. What are they? Find out on the topic page.

 

 

 

Now that you know about the benefits of cocoa, try our recipe for this traditional Mexican drink. Get the free recipe here, and see how it’s made on our Instagram. 

 

 

 


Still looking for holiday gifts? My books are available in several countries. In fact, the paperback version of The How Not to Diet Cookbook was just published in the United Kingdom! Check out our help center article to see where and how to purchase my books globally. And, as always, all proceeds from my books are donated to charity. 

 

 

 

 

Extra Virgin Olive Oil for Arthritis – What happened when topical olive oil was pitted against an ibuprofen-type drug for osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis?

 

 

Are Onions Beneficial for Testosterone, Osteoporosis, Allergies, and Cancer? – What did randomized controlled human trials find about the ways we may—or may not—benefit from eating onions?

 

 

Are Baruka Nuts the Healthiest Nut?  – How do barukas, also known as baru almonds, compare with other nuts?

 

 

 

Due to my writing schedule for my next book, How Not to Age, I will be taking a break from Q&As until summer 2022. In the meantime, you can find links to past live Q&As here on NutritionFacts.org. And, remember, I have an audio podcast to keep you company, too.

 

 

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!