

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      January 19, 2023
  


Last updated: 
  January 17, 2023
  
    • 3 min read
  




We just re-launched the Daily Dozen Challenge to help more people discover how easy it is to fit some of the healthiest of healthy foods into their meals. Join us on social media and show us how you Do the Dozen. 

For inspiration on how to Do the Dozen, check out these challenge videos:

  Fasting has been branded the “next big weight loss fad” but has a long history throughout various spiritual traditions, practiced by Moses, Jesus, Muhammed, and Buddha. Today, about one in seven American adults report using some sort of fasting as a means to control body weight. There are various approaches to fasting, from intermittent fasting to weeks of only water. For more on fasting, check out the topic page and videos such as Is Fasting for Weight Loss Safe? and The Benefits of Fasting for Healing.

 

Corn Chowder from The How Not to Diet Cookbook is a delicious comfort soup that’s perfect for the winter! This chowder can be as thick and creamy as you like, depending on how much of the soup you puree. Get the free recipe here and watch a video on how it’s made on our Instagram.

 

 

 

Thank you for all of your support in 2022! To see what we accomplished last year, check out our 2022 Year in Review report. In addition to continuing to put out new videos and blogs each week, highlights include creating The Daily Dozen Meal Planning Guide, translating the Daily Dozen app into 14 languages, and launching the free Plant-Based Living email series. Download the full report here.

 

 

 

 

Our popular eating guide is now available in Spanish and Chinese. You can download these versions on our new Guides and Handouts page or buy hard copies on DrGreger.org.

 

 

 

 

 

How Not to Die is part of Amazon’s New Year, New You January Kindle deals. Kindle Unlimited subscribers can get the book through their subscription, and in the UK, it’s available for just .99p. 

 

 

 

 

 



Vitamin D May Explain the Higher Bone Fracture Risk in Vegans: A combination of low calcium intake and low vitamin D exposure may explain higher bone fracture rates in British vegans.

 



The Purported Benefits of Vitamin K2: Should You Take Supplements?: Our body can make vitamin K2 from the K1 in green leafy vegetables.

 

 



Cholesterol and Heart Disease: Why Has There Been So Much Controversy?: Is the role of cholesterol in heart disease settled beyond a reasonable doubt?



Every month, I do a live Q&A right from my treadmill, and the next one is January 26! At 3 pm ET, tune in on our Facebook page, YouTube channel, or directly on NutritionFacts.org.

You can find links to past live Q&As here on NutritionFacts.org. And check out my recent conversation on Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine’s Exam Room podcast.

 

 

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!