

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      April 20, 2023
  


Last updated: 
  August 17, 2023
  
    • 3 min read
  




You’ve asked, and we’ve listened. Massive thanks to each one of you who wants to help spread our work to disseminate the latest in nutrition research. With more than ten years’ worth of informational content, several books and cookbooks, and our newer resources, including guides and infographics, we have plenty of ways for you to share in whatever way works best. Here are some suggestions: 

Watch our Traffic Light Dining System video in which Dr. Greger explains his traffic light system for ranking the relative healthfulness of Green Light vs. Yellow Light vs. Red Light foods, and share it with others. 




 

 

Read through our infographics on vitamin B12, vitamin D, plant-based meat, and sweet potatoes, and share any (or all) of them.

 

Cook a dish from The How Not to Die Cookbook or The How Not to Diet Cookbook, and share with friends and family. For more Green-Light recipes, check out our recipe page. 

The next time you see your doctor or dietitian, introduce them to Dr. Greger’s work. Show them the Evidence-Based Eating Guide on your phone, or give them a business card. 

 

 

Are you a part of a book club or interested in starting one? Suggest How Not to Die as the next title to read! Learn more about the book here. Why not consider hosting a screening of Dr. Greger’s “How Not to Die” or “Evidence-Based Weight Loss” presentation? Happy viewing!

 

Follow us on Facebook, Instagram, and TikTok, and share our posts. You can also add a link to NutritionFacts.org in your email signature so every recipient of a message you write is introduced to our work. For instance, add this line to your email signature: Check out NutritionFacts.org for the latest in nutrition research.

We hope these are helpful ways you can encourage healthy habits and share potentially life-changing information with others you know. As usual, everything on our website and platforms is free, and all of the proceeds from Dr. Greger’s book sales are donated to charity. Thank you for your support!

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!