

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      January 2, 2020
  


Last updated: 
  March 22, 2024
  
    • 4 min read
  




Thanks to your generosity we hit our 2019 fundraising goal! Without your support, I wouldn’t be able to spend my days digging into all of the best research and deliver it straight to you. NutritionFacts.org gets royalties from my books, but the number one funding stream that keeps us thriving is individual contributions from people like you. A huge thank you/gracias/cheers/xièxiè/dankie/merci from all our staff scattered across the globe in six countries.

Thanks to the collective enthusiasm for sharing NutritionFacts.org by our 2 million subscribers and followers, we averaged 3.75 million page views a month this year. But it’s not about the numbers; it’s about the people whose lives we’ve touched, changed, or even saved. A heartfelt thank you to everyone who has made this public service possible.

While we have hit our goal for 2019, your donations are always appreciated. If you’d still like to support my work, you can do so by making a tax-deductible donation to NutritionFacts.org — by using a credit card, Bitcoin, transferring stock, or by sending a check to:

NutritionFacts.org
PO Box 11400
Takoma Park, MD 20913

Thanks to all your pre-orders, How Not to Diet premiered at #2 on the New York Times Best Sellers list. So close! But frankly, I’m just happy it’s finally out so it can start helping people. 

One really exciting unique aspect is that all the thousands of citations are hyperlinked online to the original source, so you can scan a QR code in the book (or go directly here), and then click to download the PDFs of all the studies and access all the original research yourself.

And I was honored to be invited back onto Fox Business to discuss the book. You can watch the segment here.  

 

My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. I dive into the fascinating topic of chronobiology—the study of how our bodies’ rhythms are affected by the rhythms of nature. I’ve also got videos on ancient grains, garlic, high blood pressure, migraines, and overviews on the best foods and beverages. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now. 


Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor can opt in to receive the next three digital downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor can opt in to receive the next six new digital downloads. We sure appreciate your amazing support and hope you enjoy these rewards for your generosity!

One of my heroes, Ted Barnett, MD, FACLM, is the founder and president of a non-profit called the Rochester Lifestyle Medicine Institute. They are rolling out an innovative program designed to help doctors get reimbursed for actually educating patients about evidence-based nutrition. The 15-Day Whole-Food Plant-Based Jumpstart is a medically supervised intervention designed to be run by doctors in their own offices. Please join me in supporting the national rollout of the program with a tax-deductible donation here.

Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and Jan 23 is the day.

You can now find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!