

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      December 28, 2021



Last updated:
  May 20, 2024

    • 2 min read





Thanks to your generosity, we have almost hit our goal! Without your support, I wouldn’t be able to spend my days digging into all of the best research and delivering it straight to you. Our number one funding stream is individual contributions from people like you. A huge thank you / gracias / cheers / xièxiè / dankie / merci from all of our staff scattered in seven countries around the globe.

Despite not being able to travel this year due to the challenges brought on by the pandemic, I was heartened to connect with thousands of you through my live webinars and Q&As. Your incredibly generous support of NutritionFacts.org has been a catalyst of inspiration for the enormous undertaking of writing my new book, How Not to Age—one of my largest research projects to date.

This is the 10th anniversary of NutritionFacts.org! My gratitude goes out to everyone who has made this public service possible through your donations, sharing of videos, following on social media, gifting of books, and more. 

Please consider investing in our work by making a tax-deductible donation to NutritionFacts.org, using a credit card or PayPal. You can also transfer stock or mail a check to NutritionFacts.org, PO Box 11400, Takoma Park MD 20913. Federal employees can even donate through the CFC workplace giving program with designation number 26461.

“I started volunteering at NutritionFacts about five years ago after following Dr. Greger for a while. I thought that the science and the information on NutritionFacts was crucial for helping others and for our own wellbeing. I believe it should be easily accessible globally in every language possible, so I decided to join the Spanish-English Translation Team. I really enjoy being part of the team and have learned so much. Currently, I’m the NutritionFacts YouTube Comments Moderator. I’m still learning a lot and I’m loving it!

Since I was a child, my favorite plant-based meal has been a big, fresh green salad. I literally used to fight with my sister over who got the biggest portion and my mom always got a kick out of the fact that we didn’t fight over candy, we fought over lettuce salad!”

Next week we will be launching our new free email series on plant-based living. This 10-week series will include topics like my traffic light system, disease prevention, healthy food swaps, menu planning tools, and more. Keep your eyes out for our Top Ten of 2021 email next week, which will include the series sign-up information. And if you know someone who has been curious about a plant-based diet, invite them to subscribe to the newsletter so they can get the details about this new free program and don’t miss its launch!

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
