

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      November 2, 2017



Last updated:
  August 14, 2023

    • 3 min read





The How Not to Die Cookbook is now ready for pre-order!

It is so beautifully designed it looks like it belongs more on your coffee table than on your kitchen counter, complete with more than 120 recipes for delicious meals, snacks, and beverages made with 100% green-light ingredients to help anyone eat their way to better health.

It ships the first week of December, but the more pre-orders that are locked in before then, the greater the chances it will rocket on to the New York Times Bestseller list like last time. So to encourage pre-orders, I’m offering free signed, personalized bookplates you can stick in the cookbooks for everyone on your holiday gift list. To receive your bookplates, go here: https://nutritionfacts.org/bookplates.

Note: this is limited to the first 2,000 pre-orders, and we have about 500 left at the time of this blog publishing. (Yeah, I know I eat an anti-inflammatory diet, but my writing hand can only handle so many! :)

 



My new DVD is out today and is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. In this new volume, I cover eczema, canker sores, avocados, hot flashes and more. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online over the next few months, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch them all streaming right now. 

Here’s the full list of chapters from the new volume—a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org:

Order my new DVD as a video download/streaming at DrGreger.org/collections/downloads, or through Amazon.

If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a microwave oven expert by now, having already received a link to the new DVD. New DVDs are released every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.

Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $25 monthly contributor will receive the next three downloads for free, and anyone signing up as a $50 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs (as physical DVDs, downloads, streaming, your choice). If you signed up for physical copies, you should have already received this volume, but if not please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and we’ll make everything all better.

 

Don’t forget to share our new Spanish-language site with those who may be interested! Folks can sign up here to receive Spanish-language updates.

We are also working to share our videos and content on the popular Chinese platforms Weibo, Miaopai, WeChat, and Youku. Please consider applying here if you are fluent and able to translate in (Simplified) Mandarin.

Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and next month, Thursday, November 30th is the day.

You can catch all of my past live YouTube Q&As here and Facebook Q&As here. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio. 

 

In health,

Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
