

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      December 8, 2015
  


Last updated: 
  October 20, 2022
  
    • 2 min read
  




What about my favorite recipes, my favorite kitchen gadgets, my favorite meals? That’s not what the website was made for. It’s NutritionFacts, not nutrition opinions! Interviewers are always asking me “What do you eat, Dr. Greger?” and I have to say, “It doesn’t matter what I eat; all that matters is what the science shows.” OK, but how do I take all this amazing science I’ve learned and transform it into what I actually feed my family? How do I make it digestible? (Literally!) Well, I’ve just never had an outlet to share all those personal judgements before… until now.  That’s Part 2 of the book, in which I introduce my Daily Dozen checklist of all the things we should try to fit into an optimal diet. The book details both my life and my life’s work, all rolled into one.

Find it in your local bookstore or online at:

If you’d like to ask me a question in person, most of my December speaking events are sold out, but there is still space available in Baltimore, Tucson, and Detroit. Then I’ve already got another 60 dates confirmed for 2016.

Social Media
Please feel free to post pictures of your books as they arrive at your house and share your thoughts on social media using the hashtag #HowNotToDie.

Why This First Week is So Important 
This first week of book sales is my big chance to make it onto the New York Times Best Seller list, since all the pre-orders to date count towards first week sales. If I make it on the list, my hope is that it will interest mainstream media and expose millions more to this life-saving information. So if you’re thinking about buying copies for all your friends and family this holiday season, please consider getting them by Saturday, December 12.

Thank you for your ongoing support as I enter this new chapter of my life (actually 16 chapters! :)

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live year-in-review presentations Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death, More Than an Apple a Day, From Table to Able, and Food as Medicine.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!