

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      January 5, 2021
  


Last updated: 
  March 21, 2024
  
    • 3 min read
  




NutritionFacts.org arises from my annual review of the medical literature. With the help of a team of hundreds of volunteers, we churned through tens of thousands of papers published in the peer-reviewed scientific nutrition literature and are ramping up to break new records in 2021. How do I choose which studies to highlight? In general, I strive to focus on the most groundbreaking, interesting, and useful findings; but which topics resonate the most? The practical ones, offering cooking or shopping tips? Or those that dissect the studies behind the headlines? Maybe it’s the geeky science ones exploring the wonderfully weird world of human biology? As you can see from the below list, the answer seems to be a bit of all of the above.

#10 Stainless Steel or Cast Iron: Which Cookware Is Best? Is Teflon Safe?



This was the second in a three-video series on cookware. The first was Are Aluminum Pots, Bottles, and Foil Safe?.

What about pressure cooking? I covered that in Does Pressure Cooking Preserve Nutrients?.

Other popular practical videos of 2020 included Are Ancient Grains Healthier? and Are Pre-Cut Vegetables Just as Healthy?.

 

#9 Benefits of Garlic for Fighting Cancer and the Common Cold

Another really popular garlic video this year was the Benefits of Garlic Powder for Heart Disease.

 

 

 

#8 The Symptoms of Vitamin B12 Deficiency

This was the first in a 5-video series on B12. The other four were:

 

#7 How to Lower Blood Pressure Naturally with Lifestyle Changes

This was the second in a 3-video series.The first one was also really popular—What the New Blood Pressure Range Guidelines Mean.

 

 

#6 Benefits of Flax Seeds for Inflammation

My What Are the Best Foods? video was also popular last year. I would certainly consider flax seeds and all the other foods on the Daily Dozen to be among the best.

 

 

#5 Are BCAA (Branched Chain Amino Acids) Healthy?

This may help explain some of the benefits of plant-based proteins. I imagine I’ll explore this topic more in my next book, How Not to Age, on the latest in longevity research.

 

 

#4 Foods That Help Headache and Migraine Relief

Another really popular 2020 video exploring the clinical effects of certain foods was How to Lower LP(a) with Diet.

 

 

 

#3 Eat More Calories in the Morning to Lose Weight

It’s not just what we eat, but when! Other popular chronobiology videos in 2020 were How Circadian Rhythms Affect Blood Sugar Levels and The Benefits of Early Time-Restricted Eating.

 

 

#2 The COVID-19 Pandemic May Just Be a Dress Rehearsal

I did a whole 14-part video series on the pandemic, based on my book How to Survive a Pandemic. The other three most popular of the set were:

 

#1 Evidence-Based Weight Loss

This live presentation was based on my book How Not to Diet. If you want to watch the presentation I did for my last book, check out How Not to Die: The Role of Diet in Preventing, Arresting, and Reversing Our Top 15 Killers. The other two most popular weight loss videos this year were The Best Diet for Weight Loss and Disease Prevention and Cut the Calorie-Rich-and-Processed-Foods.

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

 

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!