

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      July 18, 2019



Last updated:
  March 21, 2024

    • 3 min read





You asked for more merch, and we answered! We’re rolling out new items on the store at DrGreger.org and celebrating with a flash sale. (As always, all proceeds go directly to support NutritionFacts.org). One of the requests has been for organic and US-made shirts, so check out the new designs here. Fill this vibrant new tote bag with all of your greens, beans, and berries. And slap our new stickers onto your laptop, water bottle, or bike.  

From now until July 21, get 15% off all new merchandise (note: discount is automatically applied at checkout). See them all at DrGreger.org under Swag and Outreach.

All of the information will eventually be available for free on NutritionFacts.org, but for a donation to our 501c3 non-profit, you can hear it all first and ask questions right on the spot. To register for the intermittent fasting webinar, visit https://nutritionfacts.org/webinar/intermittent-fasting. 

When you become a NutritionFacts.org monthly supporter, you are joining an amazing group of individuals who help ensure the latest in evidence-based nutrition reaches people all around the world. Sign up as a monthly supporter today by using this form and choosing the “recurring-monthly” option. Not only are donors the wheels that keep the 501c3 nonprofit NutritionFacts.org running, but they are also eligible for free digital downloads of the new video volumes, as well as gifts throughout the year. Go here to see the rewards, though the biggest reward is knowing you are saving lives!

I was honored to be interviewed on Mornings with Maria a few weeks ago. Check out the clip here.

Every month now I do Q&As live from my treadmill, and July 25 is the day.

You can now find links to all of my past live YouTube and Facebook Q&As right here. If that’s not enough, remember I have an audio podcast to keep you company at https://nutritionfacts.org/audio.

In health,

Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
