

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      September 22, 2022
  


Last updated: 
  December 13, 2023
  
    • 2 min read
  




My next webinar is on vitamin K. It’s been touted for bone, brain, and heart health, but have vitamin K supplements been shown to help? To complicate matters, there are multiple types of vitamin K: Vitamin K1 is concentrated in greens, and a type of vitamin K2 is found in animal products. Do we need both? Do we have to rely on a healthy microbiome for conversion from one to the other? Do we have to eat a slimy, fermented food called natto? 

Join me for a 60-minute live webinar on October 7 at 2pm ET to learn everything you ever wanted to know about vitamin K.

 

Saturated fat—the kind of fat that is solid at room temperature—is found mostly in animal products like fatty meats and dairy. We’ve known for a long time that saturated fat raises cholesterol, contributing to our number one killer, heart disease. It also impacts insulin resistance and can lead to other diseases. Hold on. I said it’s mostly found in animal products, but what about that jar of coconut oil in your cabinet that’s also solid at room temperature? Saturated fat. See what I have to say on the matter of both animal- and plant-derived saturated fats on the topic page.

Dairy is the number one source of saturated fat in the United States, but, fortunately, there are many ways to make plant-based versions of traditionally dairy-laden dishes. A cruciferous spin on macaroni and cheese, this recipe takes comfort food to a whole new level and is a tasty way to check off a few servings on the Daily Dozen checklist. This recipe comes from Kristina, our director of Nutrition & Social Media Strategy. Get the free recipe here, and watch a video on how it’s made on our Instagram. 

I’m thrilled to announce that our popular Evidence-Based Eating Guide is now available in two new languages. This resource includes information on my Traffic Light eating system, the Daily Dozen, sample menus, and more. Read about it and download a digital copy here. You can also order hard copies in English and Spanish for only the cost of printing and shipping. Help us continue creating these fun and useful resources by making a donation today!

Did you know that every NutritionFacts video has subtitles in English and a variety of other languages, prepared by our volunteers? Learn how to access them and other playback settings. Also, see important information about our translated resources.

 

 

 

 

The Role of Kimchi and H. pylori in Stomach Cancer  

What explains the Achilles’ heel in certain Asian diets?

 

 

Why Don’t Health Insurers Encourage Healthier Eating?

Why don’t more big payors in health care embrace plant-based eating?

 

 

The Best Diet for Treating Atrial Fibrillation

What foods should we eat and avoid to reduce our risk of Afib?

 

 

Every month, I do a live Q&A right from my treadmill, and the next one is October 6!

At 3 pm ET, tune in on our Facebook page, YouTube channel, or (new!) directly on NutritionFacts.org.

You can find links to past live Q&As here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember, I have an audio podcast to keep you company, too. 

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!