

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      July 9, 2012
  


Last updated: 
  August 21, 2023
  
    • 1 min read
  




Every year I scour the world’s scholarly literature on clinical nutrition pulling together what I find to be the most interesting, practical, and groundbreaking science on how best to feed ourselves and our families. I start with the 12,000 or so papers published annually on human nutrition and, thanks to a crack team of volunteers, am able to whittle those down to about 3,000 studies, which are downloaded, read, analyzed, and churned into a few hundred short videos so I can post a new video every day, year-round, to NutritionFacts.org. This certainly makes the site unique. There’s no other science-based source for free daily video updates on the latest discoveries in nutrition. The problem is that the amount of information can be overwhelming.

NutritionFacts.org now has more than 500 videos covering over 1,000 subjects. Where do you even begin? Many have expressed their appreciation for the breadth of material presented, but asked that I please try to condense this body of work into a coherent summary on how best to use diet to prevent, treat, and even reverse chronic disease. I took this feedback to heart and developed a brand-new presentation that I just premiered and will be giving around the country all year. If you weren’t at the premiere, no worries–Aaron Wissner of Local Future was, and he graciously volunteered to videotape it and so now it’s available to all!

Click here to order the digital download of my new presentation for $10. The DVD is available on Amazon. Hopefully sharing my work this way will be easier than inviting folks over for a 20-hour NutritionFacts.org online movie marathon! :)

 -Michael Greger M.D.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!