

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      December 3, 2015



Last updated:
  March 22, 2024

    • 4 min read





If you want to watch all three videos now, though, they are available as a video download as part of my new Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 28 (all proceeds go to charity). It can also be ordered as a physical DVD. The vitamin C videos are all scheduled to go up on NutritionFacts.org next year, but you can download and watch them right now.

Other topics I take on in this volume include preserving immunity in athletes, how to change your microbiome, the French paradox, the use of fennel seeds and ginger for menstrual cramps. The one that most changed my own family’s diet was Lead Contamination of Tea, in which I do a breakdown of the risks and benefits for green, white, black, and oolong tea for children, pregnant women, and adults in general.

Order my new DVD at DrGreger.org/dvds or through Amazon. It can also be ordered as a video download at DrGreger.org/downloads.

If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a vitamin C expert by now, having already received the new DVD. I come out with new DVDs every 9 weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.

Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $15 monthly contributor will receive the next three DVDs for free (as physical DVDs, downloads, or both–your choice), and anyone signing up as a $25 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs. If you’re already signed up and didn’t receive your volume 28 yet, please email Tommasina@NutritionFacts.org and she’ll make everything all better.

If you’d rather just watch all the videos online as they launch, but would still like to support my work of helping to educate millions about healthy eating, you can make a tax-deductible donation to my 501c3 nonprofit organization NutritionFacts.org using a credit card, a direct PayPal link, or by sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” PO Box 11400, Takoma Park, MD 20913.

I can’t wait! My new book How Not to Die comes out on December 8th, so there’s less than one week left to take advantage of my offer to sign and personalize copies for yourself and everyone on your gift list. Go to https://nutritionfacts.org/bookplates/ for more information. All proceeds I receive from the sales of all my books, DVDs and speaking engagements are donated to the nonprofit organization that keeps NutritionFacts.org alive, from which I receive no compensation.

Did you see the Publisher’s Weekly review? They concluded: “This evidence-based guide unpacks information useful to carnivores, vegetarians, and vegans alike, making a strong case for the healing power of food.” 

I give thanks for all those who have supported my life’s mission to reduce suffering and save lives.

In health,Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live year-in-review presentations Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death, More Than an Apple a Day, From Table to Able, and Food as Medicine.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
