

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      November 19, 2020
  


Last updated: 
  March 21, 2024
  
    • 2 min read
  




Thank you to everyone who made a donation for my birthday last month. It means the world to me! I’m very appreciative and humbled.

My new cookbook will be out on Dec 8, just under a month from now! You can preorder your copy now and get it as soon as it lands, and get a sneak peek of some recipes on our Instagram. 

Did you know my best-selling books How Not to Die and How Not to Diet are available in dozens of languages? For international ordering information, go here. 

My new volume, out today, is available as a streaming video so you can start watching the upcoming months of videos immediately. See the full list of topics here. All of these videos will eventually be available for free online on NutritionFacts.org, but they’re available now for those who don’t want to wait.

Sign up on the donation page to become a $25+ monthly contributor and be given an opportunity to receive the newest downloads for free as long as your contributions are current.

We are looking for professional EN-ES translators to join our volunteer team to help translate our videos and blogs. For more information and to apply, go here. 

 

 

 

 

Join me for another live Instagram Q&A, this time with my good friend and distinguished colleague, Vesanto Melina, MS, R.D. 

Head over to the NutritionFacts.org Instagram page on November 25 at 8pm ET to get the answers to all of your health and nutrition questions.

Rockstar dietitian Brenda Davis has a brand-new book out with pediatrician Reshma Shah. NOURISH is the nutrition guide parents have been waiting for. It is a reliable, evidence-based, and accessible resource for families who want to raise their children to be the healthiest they can be.

 

 

 

 



 

The Symptoms of Vitamin B12 Deficiency

Vitamin B12 deficiency is known as “The Great Masquerader.” Take a look at the many facets of the symptoms.

 



The Healthiest Food Sources of Vitamin B12

What are the best Green-Light (whole food, plant-based) sources of vitamin B12 to meet the optimal dosage?

 

 



What Is the Safest Metabolism Booster?

To lose weight, drink water. Two cups of water can result in a surge of the adrenal hormone noradrenaline in your bloodstream, as if you had just smoked a few cigarettes or downed a few cups of coffee.

Every month, I do a Q&A live from my treadmill, and Nov. 25 is the day this month.

Join on our Facebook page or YouTube channel at 3pm ET. I’ll be streaming to both at the same time!

You can find links to all of my past live Q&As here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember I also have an audio podcast to keep you company.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!