

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      May 27, 2021



Last updated:
  March 20, 2024

    • 3 min read





My new digital DVD, Volume 54, is out today and covers statins, SIBO, moringa, appetite, and more. It is available as a streaming video so you can start watching it immediately. Each video in this new collection will be released online over the next few months, available for free, but if you don’t want to wait, you can watch all of them by streaming right now. 

Sign up on the donation page to become a $25+ monthly contributor, and be given an opportunity to receive the newest downloads for free as long as your contributions are current.

We’re so appreciative of each one of our donors. Without your support, we wouldn’t be able to continue our work. See what we were able to accomplish in 2020, thanks to you. Check out our Year in Review, and please accept our gratitude.


This simple and decadent recipe comes from The How Not to Die Cookbook. Avocado and almond butter mix with cocoa to create a rich dessert. Get the free recipe here, and watch how it’s made over on our Instagram.

Read more on our topic page and check out our videos on mental health, including Which Foods Increase Happiness? and Exercise vs. Drugs for Depression.

 

Did you know that all of our videos are captioned in English and the majority are also translated into multiple languages, thanks to our hard-working team of volunteers?

We are conducting a survey to find out how much you know about and access these captions and translations.

The survey takes just a few minutes, and your response will help us continue to improve our translations and captions to reach as many people around the world with this life-saving information. As a token of our gratitude, respondents will receive a discount code for DrGreger.org for completing the survey. Thank you in advance!

P.S: If you have a strong background in professional translation and would like to help make this life-saving information more accessible in your language, please apply now!

 



 

Each month I transcribe the questions from Dr. Greger’s live Q&A’s for Facebook and YouTube so when people look at the video description on YouTube, they can see exactly what was covered that month. Previous to volunteering, I would tune in and learn so much! I decided I wanted to volunteer to help, and transcribing was a great way to learn and contribute to the community all at once.

My favorite plant-based food is chickpeas. There are so many ways to eat them from just roasting them to making hummus. I eat them every weeknight in all kinds of different recipes! 

 



 

Kombucha’s Side Effects: Is It Bad for You?
What are the risks versus benefits of drinking kombucha?

 

 

The Best Diet for Fatty Liver Disease Treatment
What are the three sources of liver fat in fatty liver disease? How do you get rid of it?

 

 

Flashback Friday: Are There Risks and Benefits of Energy Drinks?

Red Bull, Monster, and Rockstar brand energy drinks are put to the test.

 

 

Every month, I do a Q&A live from my treadmill, and today, May 27 is the day.

Join on our Facebook page or YouTube channel at 3pm EDT. I’ll be streaming to both at the same time!

You can find links to past live Q&As here on NutritionFacts.org. If that’s not enough, remember, I have an audio podcast to keep you company, too.

 

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
