

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      January 28, 2016



Last updated:
  April 5, 2024

    • 1 min read





I also have new videos queued up over the next few months on foods to treat acne (barberries), improve athletic performance (fennel seeds), and strengthen our bones (almonds). If you don’t want to wait, all of these videos are available now as a digital download as part of my new Latest in Clinical Nutrition volume 29 (all proceeds go to charity). It can also be ordered as a physical DVD.

I also cover how to treat infant colic, counter the inflammation of aging, increase happiness, prevent gout attacks, fight lupus, and regenerate Coenzyme Q10 naturally.

The current batch of videos from volume 28 are about to run out on NutritionFacts.org. So, starting next month and running until April, I’ll roll out the videos from this new DVD, volume 29. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts, but there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up free online at NutritionFacts.org. If you’d like the works—50+ hours of video—you can get the complete DVD collection.

If you were a regular supporter, you’d already be a Splenda expert by now, having already received the new DVD. I come out with new DVDs every 9 weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.

Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $15 monthly contributor will receive the next three DVDs for free (as physical DVDs, downloads, or both—your choice), and anyone signing up as a $25 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs. If you’re already signed up and didn’t receive your volume 29 yet, please email DVDhelp@NutritionFacts.org and she’ll make everything all better.

If you’d rather just watch all the videos online as they launch, but would still like to support my work of helping to educate millions about healthy eating, you can make a tax-deductible donation to my 501c3 nonprofit organization NutritionFacts.org using a credit card, Bitcoin, a direct PayPal link, or by sending a check to “NutritionFacts.org” PO Box 11400, Takoma Park, MD 20913.

We were inspired to do this given the remarkable popularity of the little “Dr. Greger’s Daily Dozen” app (available free for Android and iPhone) some generous volunteers created for How Not to Die. I’ve gotten such nice feedback from people who are finding it useful, so we’re going to be working on adding new features to that as well.

I realize it’s not enough to just lay out all the science. That’s why we’re trying to come up with new ways to help you incorporate healthier eating into your life as seamlessly as possible.

After four weeks on the New York Times Bestseller list, it looks like How Not to Die may soon become an international best seller too! It is currently being translated and scheduled to be published in Albania, the Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Holland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mongolia (!), Poland, Portugal, Russia, Spain, and the UK with offers pending in Slovakia and Sweden.

Holy буржгар байцаа! (that’s evidently Mongolian for “kale”),

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live year-in-review presentations Uprooting the Leading Causes of Death, More Than an Apple a Day, From Table to Able, and Food as Medicine.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
