

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      January 30, 2014
  


Last updated: 
  April 2, 2024
  
    • 2 min read
  




The newest volume of my Latest in Clinical Nutrition DVD series is now out. Order on my website or through Amazon (all proceeds go to the 501c3 nonprofit charity that keeps NutritionFacts.org up and running). It can also now be ordered as a video download.

The last batch of videos from volume 16 just ran out, so running through March I’ll be rolling out the videos from this new DVD, volume 17. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts, but there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up free online at NutritionFacts.org. If you’d like the works—more than 30 hours of video–I have a special on my complete DVD collection (also via download).

Here’s the list of chapters from the new volume 17 DVD – a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org:

Order my new DVD at DrGreger.org/dvds or as video downloads at DrGreger.org/downloads. All the proceeds from DVD, download, and book sales go to keep NutritionFacts.org alive and kicking.

On January 13, 2014, NutritionFacts.org hit another major milestone–20 million pageviews since the site launched in 2011. Thanks to all of our supporters, millions of people have gotten their recommended daily allowance of dietary sanity. If you’d like to chip in, you can make a tax-deductible donation using a credit card, through Paypal, or by sending a check made out to “NutritionFacts.org” to P.O. Box 11400 Takoma Park, MD 20913.

If you were a regular supporter, you could be watching the new DVD right now! I’m now coming out with new DVDs every nine weeks or so. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re even available to the public, consider becoming a monthly donor.

 
I hope everyone’e healthy New Year’s resolutions are still going strong!

-Michael Greger, M.D.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!