

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      April 8, 2014



Last updated:
  April 2, 2024

    • 3 min read





The newest volume of my Latest in Clinical Nutrition DVD series is now out. Order on my website or through Amazon (all proceeds go to the 501c3 nonprofit charity that keeps NutritionFacts.org thriving). It can also be ordered as a video download.

The current batch of videos from volume 17 on NutritionFacts.org just ran out, so starting this month and running through June, I’ll be rolling out the videos from this new DVD, volume 18. The DVDs give folks the opportunity to sneak-preview videos months ahead of time, watch them all straight through, and share them as gifts, but there is nothing on the DVDs that won’t eventually end up free online at NutritionFacts.org. If you’d like the works—40 hours of video—I have a special on my complete DVD collection.

Here’s the list of chapters from the new volume 18 DVD — a preview of what’s to come over the next few months on NutritionFacts.org:

Order my new DVD at DrGreger.org/dvds  or through Amazon. It can also now be ordered as a video download.or as video downloads at DrGreger.org/downloads.

All the proceeds from DVD, download, and book sales go to the 501c3 nonprofit charity that keeps NutritionFacts.org alive and kicking.
 
DVD Subscription
If you were a regular supporter, you could be watching the new DVD right now! I come out with brand new DVDs every nine weeks. If you’d like to automatically receive them before they’re available to the public, please consider becoming a monthly donor.

Anyone signing up on the donation page to become a $15 monthly contributor will receive the next three DVDs for free (as physical DVDs, downloads, or both–your choice), and anyone signing up as a $25 monthly contributor will get a whole year’s worth of new DVDs. If you’re already signed up and didn’t receive your volume 18 yet, please email Tommasina at Tommasina@NutritionFacts.org and she’ll make everything all better.

New Hires
After running more than 500 applicants through a gauntlet of tests and trials, we now have three new full-time staff on board, Tommasina Miller on social media, Katie Schloer overseeing logistics, and Elizabeth Tov as Keynote specialist, along with six new part-time researchers! Please join me in welcoming everyone to the NutritionFacts.org dream team.

This does put us over our projected budget for the year, but with so much new talent on board I’m hoping we’ll be able to grow the audience sufficient to make up the difference. NutritionFacts.org now exists solely on donations from viewers like you. Everything on the website is and always will be free for all, for all time. We refuse to accept ad revenue or corporate sponsorships to retain our independence. If you value the public service NutritionFacts.org provides and would like to do your share and chip in, you can make a tax-deductible donation using a credit card, through Paypal, or by sending a check made out to “NutritionFacts.org” P.O. Box 11400 Takoma Park, MD 20913.

New Way to Support
Online retail giant Amazon.com has a new program called AmazonSmile, in which they donate a small percent of purchases to a charitable organization of your choice. If you click on http://smile.amazon.com/ch/05-0559626 you can direct their donations to NutritionFacts.org. If you do shop through Amazon, please consider having them support our work by clicking on that link every time you shop.

Speaking Tour
As you can see on my list of speaking dates, I’ve cut my travel schedule in half this year so I can concentrate on research. I can’t wait to share my findings, but alas it will be more online than in person this year. In 2015, though, I’m presenting on two wellness cruises–how fun! One with Victoria Moran and Dr. Will Tuttle leaving from New York City in February and one with Drs. T. Colin Campbell and Neal Barnard leaving from Miami in March. I hope you can join me at sea!

May your springtime be a season of renewal and farmer’s market deliciousness,

-Michael Greger, M.D.

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
