

  Written By 
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM
  
  •
  
      August 22, 2024
  


Last updated: 
  August 26, 2024
  
    • 3 min read
  




Does eating fish or taking fish oil supplements reduce stroke risk? 

In my last video, we started to explore what might explain the higher stroke risk in vegetarians found in the EPIC-Oxford study. As you can see below and at 0:25 in my video Vegetarians and Stroke Risk Factors: Omega-3s?, vegetarians have a lower risk of heart disease and cardiovascular disease overall, but a higher risk of stroke. We looked into vitamin D levels as a potential mechanism, but that didn’t seem to be the reason. What about long-chain omega-3s, the fish fats like EPA and DHA? 



Not surprisingly, their levels are found to be “markedly lower in vegetarians and particularly in vegans than in meat-eaters.” They’re about 30 percent lower in vegetarians and more than half as low in vegans, as you can see below and at 0:45 in my video. 



According to “the most extensive systematic assessment of effects of omega-3 fats on cardiovascular health to date,” combining 28 randomized controlled trials, there is no benefit for stroke. There is evidence that taking fish oil “does not reduce heart disease, stroke or death,” or overall mortality, either. This may be because, on the one hand, the omega-3s may be helping, but the mercury in fish may be making things worse. “Balancing the benefits with the contaminant risks of fish consumption has represented a challenge for regulatory agencies and public health professionals.”  

For example, dietary exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) may be associated with an increased risk of stroke. In one study, for instance, “neither ﬁsh nor intake of PCBs was related to stroke risk. However, with adjustment for fish intake,” that is, at the same ﬁsh intake, “dietary PCBs were associated with an increased risk of total stroke,” so the PCB pollutants may be masking the fish benefit. If we had a time machine and could go back before the Industrial Revolution and find ﬁsh in an unpolluted state, we might find that it is protective against stroke. Still, looking at the EPIC-Oxford study data, if fish were protective, then we might expect that the pescatarians (those who eat fish but no other meat) would have lower numbers of strokes since they would have the fish benefit without the risk from other meat. But, no. That isn’t the reality. So, it doesn’t seem to be the omega-3s either.

Let’s take a closer look at what the vegetarians are eating.

When it comes to plant-based diets for cardiovascular disease prevention, all plant foods are not created equal. There are two types of vegetarians—those who do it for their health, and those who do it for ethical reasons, like global warming or animals—and the latter tend to eat different diets. Health vegans tend to eat more fruits and fewer sweets, for instance, and you don’t tend to see them chomping down on vegan donuts, as shown below and at 2:41 in my video. 



“Concerns about health and costs were primary motivations for [meat] reduction” in the United States. A middle-class American family is four times more likely to reduce meat for health reasons compared to environmental or animal welfare concerns, as you can see in the graph below and at 2:55 in my video. 



But in the United Kingdom, where the EPIC-Oxford stroke study was done, ethics was the number one reason given for becoming vegetarian or vegan, as you can see in below and at 3:05 in my video.



We know that “plant-based diets, diets that emphasize higher intakes of plant foods and lower intakes of animal foods, are associated with a lower risk of incident cardiovascular disease, cardiovascular disease mortality, and all-cause mortality”—a lower risk of dying from all causes put together—“in a general US adult population.” But, that’s only for healthy plant foods. Eating a lot of Wonder Bread, soda, and apple pie isn’t going to do you any favors. “For all types of plant-based diets, however, it is crucial that the choice of plant foods is given careful consideration.” We should choose whole fruits and whole grains over reﬁned grains and avoid trans fats and added sugars. Could it be that the veggie Brits were just eating more chips? We’ll find out next. 

Another strikeout trying to explain the increased risk. Could it be that the vegetarians were eating particularly unhealthy diets? Labels like vegetarian or vegan just tell me what is not being eaten. You can be vegetarian and consume a lot of unhealthy fare, like french fries, potato chips, and soda. That’s why, as a physician, I prefer the term whole food, plant-based nutrition. That tells me what you do eat. You eat vegetables and follow a diet centered around the healthiest foods out there.

If you missed the first four videos in this series, see:

 Surprised about the fishy oil findings? Learn more: Is Fish Oil Just Snake Oil? and Omega-3s and the Eskimo Fish Tale. 

Vegetarians, especially vegans, tend to have lower levels of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids like EPA and DHA, which are typically found in fish. However, evidence from randomized controlled trials suggests that omega-3 supplementation does not reduce the risk of stroke or cardiovascular disease mortality. 

Fish, while rich in omega-3s, may also contain contaminants like mercury and PCBs, which could counteract any potential cardiovascular benefits. Dietary exposure to PCBs, for example, has been associated with an increased risk of stroke. 

The EPIC-Oxford study found that vegetarians in the UK were motivated more by ethical reasons than health concerns. Different motivations for adopting a vegetarian diet may result in variations in dietary patterns, with health-oriented vegetarians consuming more fruits and fewer sweets compared to those motivated by ethics. 

Plant-based diets are associated with a lower risk of cardiovascular disease and mortality, but the quality of plant foods matters. Consuming whole fruits and whole grains, and avoiding refined grains, trans fats, and added sugars, for example, are crucial for maximizing the health benefits of a plant-based diet. 

It’s important to carefully consider food choices within a plant-based diet to ensure optimal health outcomes. Prioritizing nutrient-dense plant foods over processed and unhealthy options is essential for reducing the risk of cardiovascular disease and stroke. 

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.
  

Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626
                    


                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!