

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      March 31, 2020



Last updated:
  November 7, 2023

    • 2 min read



          Image Credit: Pixabay. This image has been modified.

Five studies have been performed on breast cancer survival and soy foods involving more than 10,000 breast cancer patients, and together they found that those who eat more soy live longer and have a lower risk of the cancer coming back. What about women who carry breast cancer genes? Fewer than 10 percent of breast cancer cases run in families, but when they do, it tends to be mutations to one of the tumor suppressor genes, BRCA1 or BRCA2. BRCA 1 and BRCA 2 are involved in DNA repair, so if either one of them is damaged, chromosomal abnormalities can result, which can set us up for cancer. I examine this in my video Should Women at High Risk for Breast Cancer Avoid Soy?.

This idea that we have tumor suppressor genes goes back to famous research from the 1960s that showed that if we fuse together a normal cell with a cancer cell, rather than the cancer cell turning the normal cell malignant, the normal cell actually suppresses the cancerous one. Tumor suppressor genes are typically split into two types: gatekeeper genes that keep cancer cells in check and caretaker genes that prevent the cell from becoming cancerous in the first place. BRCA genes appear able to do both, which is why their function is so important.

Until recently, dietary recommendations for those with mutations to BRCA genes focused on reducing DNA damage caused by free radicals by eating lots of antioxidant-packed fruits and vegetables. If our DNA repair capacity is low, we want to be extra careful about damaging our DNA in the first place. But what if we could also boost BRCA function? In my video BRCA Breast Cancer Genes and Soy, I showed how, in vitro, soy phytoestrogens could turn back on BRCA protection suppressed by breast cancer, upregulating BRCA expression as much as 1,000 percent within 48 hours.

Does that translate out of the petri dish and into the person? Apparently so. Soy intake was associated with only a 27 percent breast cancer risk reduction in people with normal BRCA genes, but a 73 percent risk reduction in carriers of BRCA gene mutations. So, a healthy diet may be particularly important for those at high genetic risk. Meat consumption, for example, was linked to twice as much risk in those with BRCA mutations: 97 percent increased risk instead of only 41 percent increased breast cancer risk in those with normal BRCA genes. So, the same dietary advice applies to those with and without BRCA mutations, but it’s more important when there’s more risk.

What about women without breast cancer genes or those who have already been diagnosed? See my video Is Soy Healthy for Breast Cancer Survivors?.

What is in meat that may increase risk? See:

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
