

  Written By
    Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

  •

      April 21, 2022



Last updated:
  April 21, 2022

    • 2 min read





A couple months ago, I emailed a recipe for Oatmeal Cookie Dough Bites, and they were such a hit that I wanted to share another healthy sweet treat. These brownie cookies have a date-sweetened creamy filling and are a great way to get a serving of beans—yes! beans!—while satisfying a sweet tooth. Check out the recipe here, and watch a video on how they’re made on our Instagram.

 

There’s still time to help us send 12,500 free copies of our Evidence-Based Eating Guide to health care practitioners in all 50 states. Just $20 allows us to print and ship 16 copies of the guide to a doctor’s office, hospital, or health clinic. With increased publishing and shipping costs, we’d be even more grateful for your help in getting them directly into the hands of the very people whose lives can be changed with our practical guide to healthy eating.

Please consider making a donation to help us spread the health! 

 

April is World Autism Month. Many families with a child on the autism spectrum pursue dietary and nutritional approaches as components of treatment. There are some dietary interventions that appear to be successful in helping to manage the troublesome symptoms of autism. One is sulforaphane, which is formed almost exclusively in cruciferous vegetables. Check out the topic page for a summary and a list of all of my autism videos, including Alternative Treatments for Autism and Best Foods for Autism.

 

 

Flashback Fridays are becoming Friday Favorites. I love resharing oldie-but-goodie videos for people who may have missed them the first time around, and those videos are getting a new look starting in May. 

 

 





 

Why Don’t People Eat Healthier? The so-called optimism bias may get in the way of a healthy lifestyle.

 

 

How to Boost FGF21 with Diet for Longevity Fasting and exercise can boost the longevity hormone FGF21, but what can we eat—or avoid eating—to get similar effects?

 

 

 

How to Keep Your Microbiome Healthy with Prebiotic Foods We co-evolved a symbiosis with our good gut bacteria, but we are not holding up our end of the bargain.

 

 

 

In health,
Michael Greger, M.D.

PS: If you haven’t yet, you can subscribe to my free videos here and watch my live, year-in-review presentations:

Michael Greger M.D. FACLM

A founding member and Fellow of the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, Michael Greger, MD, is a physician, New York Times bestselling author, and internationally recognized speaker on nutrition. Dr. Greger has lectured at the Conference on World Affairs, testified before Congress, and was invited as an expert witness in the defense of Oprah Winfrey in the infamous “meat defamation” trial.


  Subscribe to our free newsletter and receive our Care for Your Skin as You Age infographic.


Catch up with Dr. Greger at one of his live speaking engagements:




Charity ID: 05-0559626



                    We  our volunteers!                    Apply Now!
